Switches, Relays and Contactors
Switches, Relays and Contactors
Switches, relays and contaclors are a family of basic
devices used to control flow of current in an electrical
system. The generic switch has been around from the
very beginning of electrification. Houses were convert-
ed from gas or oil to electrical illumination by literally
fastening lamp fixtures to ceilings, switches to walls and
connecting the whole mess together with wires that
were stapled to the surface. Even in these rudimentary
beginnings, switches were constructed to accomplish
connection or disconnection of electrical circuits with a
snap. As one rotated the handle of an early light
switch, a feeling of winding up a spring was unmistaka-
ble. At some point, tension was sufficient to push
internal parts past a detent and the switch would
complete its operation with a "click"; a sudden release
of tension could be felt in the fingers.
The need for snap action was well understood, espe-
cially in the early days of domestic power distribution.
Most houses were first supplied with direct current
(d.c.) in contrast with present day systems which supply
alternating current (a.c.). In the section on over voltage
protection I described special design efforts required
to control the fire between spreading relay contacts
which are attempting to bring a failed alternator/regu-
lator system under control. When d.c. was routed to
our ancestors homes, the problem of controlling high
voltage had to be addressed. In this instance, the high
d.c. voltage was not developed by a collapsing magnetic
field. The voltage was already high; 100 volts or so as
delivered to the back of the house!
A simpler device known as a knife switch was universal
in industrial applications. It operates in a manner which
is suggested by its name: a blade of conductive material
was moved by an insulated handle so that it was forced
between two spring loaded leaves of conductive materi-
al thus making a connection. Breaking connection was
accomplished by simply pulling the blade from between
the leaves.
My earliest recollection of knife switches is from old
black and white movies. The good Doctor Frankenstein,
standing over his patient, is yelling instructions to Igor
who manipulates many switches and knobs on the
laboratory apparatus. Operation of these switches is
always accompanied with flashes of fire and puffs of
Pagesmoke. The . effects were undoubtedly enhanced for the
benefit of the movie viewers, but then fire and smoke
was not totally out of character for this type of switch.
Indeed, hesitant or sloppy operation of a knife switch in
a high voltage circuit would produce long, hot blue
sparks accompanied by subsequent damage to the
switch.
Purveyors of early electrification products and services
knew that consumers would not be favorably impressed
with little fires and puffs of smoke at their fingertips.
Snap action switches were developed in a successful
attempt to keep 'lights" off of walls and up on ceilings
where they belonged! Control of high voltage d.c. using
snap action switches required no instruction or special
action on the part of the switch operator. A child could
easily accomplish a making or breaking of connection.
Thus children began to "make" more connections than
they "broke" and the seeds of eternally illuminated
children's bedrooms were planted. They thrive to this
day!
If you have ordered catalogs from firms listed in
Appendix A, then you have access to a pretty good
cross section of many ways in which switches are made.
Start with parts that hang out through the panel: the
actuator handle. For actuator choices one finds toggles,
rockers, paddles, buttons and knobs, just to name the
most ordinary. Then there are single-pole, double-pole
and many-pole types capable of switching several cir-
cuits simultaneously. The part of a switch that hides
behind the panel has about as many different configura-
tions as the part that sticks out the front!
To assist in communicating switch functions, a simple
language has been devised. It goes like this: to describe
a switch that simply controls a landing light, one would
ask for a "single-pole, single-throw" switch. This is
abbreviated by writing SPST. To describe a switch like
that used to control the avionics/essential bus on wiring
diagrams in Appendix Z, one requests a "two-pole,
double-throw" with terminal interconnections made in
all three switch positions. Its function is abbreviated by
writing DPDT, ON-ON-ON. On the same diagrams a
combination fuel pump and electric primer switch are
shown. This switch is identical to the avionics bus switch
except an extreme position is spring-loaded to center.
11-1
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
~"0
SINGLE POLE, SINGLE THROW
(SPST, OFF-ON)
—(V"" >
O—
SINGLE POLE, DOUBLE THROW
' CENTER OFF (SPOT. ON-OFF-ON)
DOUBLE (DPDT, 'q
 POLE, ON-ON-ON)
 DOUBLE THROW
-A.
O
SINGLE POLE, DOUBLE THROW
(SPOT, ON-ON)
-~ymr" >
I
 O—
—Cm"" >
O—
DOUBLE POLE, DOUBLE THROW
CENTER OFF (DPDT, ON-OFF-ON)
~t
 LANDING \.L 'g
 i
 LT
 jl
 11
DOUBLE POLE, DOUBLE THROW
 TAXI LIT
(DPDT, ON-ON-ON)
WIRED FOR SP3T OPERATION
Figure 11-1. Toggle Switch Configurations
Page 11-2
The AeroElectric Connection
Its abbreviation is DPDT, ON-ON-(ON). The paren-
thesis about one of the positions indicates spring load-
ing. Suppose you needed a switch to operate an electric
trim actuator with a permanent magnet motor. An
appropriate switch would be a DPDT, (ON)-OFF-
(ON). It would provide a trim up and trim down posi-
tions with spring loading to the center off position.
Specialized switches permit single switches to perform
multiple functions thereby reducing panel space needed
to do a job. Wiring diagrams in Appendix Z have
several examples of "panel space conservation". For
example, the magneto switches also control starter
functions. The fuel pump switch also controls an elec-
tric primer valve. The avionics master switch controls
essential bus connection to main bus, selects an emer-
gency mode essential bus feed directly from battery and
also disables the starter circuits if the switch is not
positioned to shut off the avionics! How's that for
squeezing triple duty from a single switch? If you plan
to install both landing and taxi lights, consider a single
switch of the DPDT, ON-ON-ON type. Wire it for the
SP3T function like the avionics master but leave the
lower position connection unused for "OFF", wire the
mid position to illuminate the taxi light and the upper
position to illuminate the landing light. These examples
are illustrated in Figure 11-1.
Switch selection tasks usually begin with a choice of
actuator. . . . the part you grab with your fingers. The
traditional actuator is the "bat handle" which accurately
describes its appearance. Other shapes include flat
paddles, tapered paddles, rockers, lighted rockers, etc.
This part of the selection is a matter of style and is
pretty much up to the builder and his pocket book!
The next consideration is the electrical rating of the
switch. Most of the catalogs from the vendors listed in
Appendix A will have abbreviated if not complete speci-
fications for the switches they offer. Unfortunately, the
real implication of the manufacturer's ratings is not cut
and dried. Here is a sketch of what the ratings are
about:
A switch will have both a voltage and a current rating
equated with a switching task. For example, suppose
you read that a switch is rated at 10 amps resistive at
125 volts AC, 7 amps resistive at 250 volts AC and 5
amps inductive. Sometimes you even see a "tungsten"
rating on a switch which refers to its ability to handle
light bulb loads. A sampling of the three types of loads
is shown in Figure 11-2. Is the thing suited to an appli-
cation in your airplane? Let us consider the character
Switches, Relays and Contactors
of these loads first.
A nesistive load refers to a device which is neither induc-
tive or tungsten-like in nature. Very few devices in an
airplane fall into the category of resistive. Avionics
components will make up the bulk of resistive loads.
The nature of a resistive load is that the inrush, running
and breaking currents and voltages are all the same.
For example, suppose you were selecting a switch to
control a 450 watt electric heater in a 28-volt Long-Eze.
Referring to the techniques introduced in Section 1, you
may deduce that a 450 watt heater will draw 450/26 =
17.3 Amps. Why 26 volts? Recall in earlier discussions
many devices with large current draws will be rated for
operation at some level below normal bus voltage.
Sharp component designers recognize the fact that zero
resistance wire is not available and some drop in inter-
connect wiring is to be expected. An electric heating
element is almost purely resistive meaning that the
instant the switch is dosed, an inrush of 17.3 amps can
be expected. While the switch is closed, a running
current of 17.3 amps can be expected. And lastly, when
the switch is opened, no inductive voltage spike is
expected. With no inductive spike the contact spreading
velocity of the switch may characterized for breaking a
28-volt circuit, not a several hundred volt circuit!
An inductive load is a device which is internally con-
structed with coils of wire around magnetic materials of
some type. These devices include motors, relays,
contactors, solenoids, some strobe light power supplies,
electric primer valves, etc. The inductive spike phe-
nomenon was explained in detail in the section on over-
voltage protection so I won't dig into it here. Suffice
it to say that the act of turning an inductive load OFF is
the difficult part. When a switch is poorly adapted to its
task, energy stored in the magnetic circuit of the induc-
tive component is dissipated at the opening contact
points of the switch. Motors present a worst case sort of
switching task. Obviously wound with many turns of
wire, they are quite inductive. However, it also take
much more current to start a motor than that which is
required to run it. Motors will be described in detail in
a later section but we are all familiar with the dimming
of the house lights when an air conditioner or washing
machine kicks on. Furthermore, it is a rare airplane
that doesn't show a momentary but distinct dimming of
panel lights when electric flaps or landing gear are
extended. Motor inrush currents may be 4 to 10 times
the running current.
Heavy duty contactors can also wreak inductively in-
duced havoc. An inductiw spike from the coil of a
Page 11-3
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
"^%
G,
 IQ
Z ,r=>,
!
'A
 a
F
S 10
'^
¢
~'b
 i
 .
PITQT TUBE
i-EATER
vi =,
 ~
|"1
~<J
 ANTILATION
fYjWfR MTR
Figure 11-2. Resistive, Tungsten and Inductive Loads.
cootactor can be hard on the switch that controls it. It
can also damage sensitive, improperly protected elec-
troaic components. For row [ will conceotrate on the
task of controlling inductive devices; the taming of the
inductive shrew will be discussed in detail in the section
on electrical noise.
The so called tungsten characteristic refers to li®ht
bulbs. Iii the section on lighting I will discuss the
operation of lamps in detail but for now, know that the
theoretical inrush curreat on a landing light can be 16
times its runtiing current! Lets see. . . ISO watts divided
by 13 volts is 115 amps. Sixteen times 115 amps is 184
amps!!!!!
What's a mother to do? Where are we going to find a
panel mounted switch for a landiog light that is good
for 184 amps? Take heart. Note tbat [ used the term
"theoretical" in front of the word "inrush". All inrush
values assume that full rated voltage is available to
power the lamp from the first instant of switch closure.
Let us accomplish a quickie analysis of a landing light
turn-on sceuario:
PageThe device which is capable of delivering the landing
light inrush current is the battery. The alternator's
output will mitigate any load on the battery. However,
for the purposes of this analysis we will assume that it's
assistance is negligible. Starting with the battery, let us
assume that the internal resistance of the battery is 12
milliohms which says that the dead short current limit
on the battery is oa the order of 1000 amps. Let us
further assume that our Long Eze uses 6AWG battery
supply ami ground wires tocaling sevea feet for an addi-
tioaal 3 milliohms. Let's call out the landing light
supply and ground wires as 16AWG md 8 feet loog for
another 32 milliohms. Looking at the light bulb itself.
to draw 184 amps at 13 volts requires a cold filament
resistance of 13/184 = .065 ohms or 65 milliohms.
Adding up all of the resistances we get 65 + 32 " 3 "
12 for a totd of 112 milliohms. In the sectioa oq bacter-
ies, I described a battery as a 12 volt device internally so
the real inrush current at the instant of switch closure is
more on the order of 12 volts divided by 0.112 ohms or
107 amps! This oumber is still big but certainly much
less than 184. There are inductive effects of the wiring
to consider and lastly, this inrush lasts for less than a
11-4
The AeroElectric Connection
millisecond since the lamp bulb's current draw drops
rapidly as the filament warms up.
In actual practice, the landing light may be expected to
have a peak inrush on the order of 80 amps or about 7
times the rated load current of the lamp. The same
sort of conditions apply to motor starting loads but they
last much longer. As a general rule, motor inrush
currents will be ten times longer in duration because
load current is a function of motor speed and it takes
longer to spin up a motor armature than it takes to heat
a lamp filament.
A resistive load is the most benign. Therefore, a resistive
load rating is the larger of the three for all switches.
Depending upon a switch's design, either tungsten or
inductive loads could be considered to be a worst case.
A switch might have very heavy contacts and be quite
suited to high inrush switching but heavy contacts are
harder to accelerate apart and the switch might get
lower marks for inductive loads. On the other hand, a
very fast over-center mechanism might be driving light
weight contacts. This device might be capable of break-
ing the nastiest of inductive spike arcs but the light
contacts won't do so well in the high inrush application.
Looking at the manufacturers' ratings again, suppose
we put a switch rated at 15 amps resistive into a slot that
controlled our 17.3 amp heater? Does this mean the
switch is going to smoke after a few minutes? Suppose
we used a miniature toggle switch mounted on a control
stick for electric trim. The switch was rated for 2 amps
inductive. We were running a 1 amp trim motor with it
but the switch failed. Teardown disclosed a functioning
mechanism but badly burned contacts. What went
wrong? In the section on overvoltage relays I said, "if
you let me pick the 2 amp inductive circuit, I would
show you how to melt down a 10 amp inductive rated
relay or switch." Well, here is the rest of the story about
switch ratings.
There are hundreds of test specifications for rating
switches. The military has written at least 50 different
specs that I have referred to over the years. Under-
writer's Laboratories has a fist-full of test specs too.
However, UL testing is user safety oriented, not
product performance oriented. I've had experiences
with UL approved devices that didn't work worth a toot
but they didn't set my house on fire either! Added to
this are many commercial and industrial specifications
for rating switches. A great deal of commonality is
shared by these specifications. However, each spec was
created to address a "special" need. The need might be
Switches, Relays and Contactors
as exotic as an application on a spacecraft. Or perhaps
the manufacturer simply tailored the specs to match his
ability (or inability) to build switches.
The rating of a switching device can be deceptive. I
remember two instances wherein I was mandated to
used a "heavier" switching device than I had originally
specified just as a safety factor. Both situations in-
volved secondary trim systems, one a twin jet and the
other a high performance twin turboprop. In the in-
stance of the jet, i had designed a seventeen dollar, 2-
amp nsistive, l-amp inductive rated relay into the direc-
tion control system of a motor that was drawing 1.8
amps worst case though the relay. I had spent many
hours selecting arc suppression networks to match the
system characteristics and had proved the relay to be
good for over 100,000 cycles as designed. The customer
arbitrarily selected a 5-amp resistive, 3-amp inductive
device to go in the same slot. This newer, "stronger"
relay sold for over $100 a copy! It was simply "insur-
ance" they said.
My inspection of the relay showed that it did indeed
have heavier contacts and was well suited to carrying 5
amps but the spreading velocity was much slower and
the final resting air gap between the open contacts was
less one half the gap in the 2-amp relay! My protests
yielded naught and the big husky relay went into pro-
duction. Over the next few years that I was associated
with that product, the direction change relay was in the
top five trouble items for the product. The heavy duty
relays often failed in less than 100 hours of flight serv-
ice. Somehow nobody could seem to recall who spec'ed .
the bigger, more expensive relay into the product and
we fielded a lot of flack over the failures. But, the
product was certified and the cost of recertification was
too much to justify any changes.
The other was a case where I had specified a sub-
miniature switch to be used in a pilot's secondary trim
switch mechanism. The switch I had selected was by a
well known manufacturer and again, I was using it at or
near its design limits. My superior wanted some "insur-
ance" and insisted that I find a 'better" switch. I did
find a switch by an obscure manufacturer that had a
slightly better rating. I found that it was better only
because of the spec that it was tested to but that was of
no concern to my boss. If the catalog gave it a better
rating, it had to be better in our application so that's
what we bought. Fortunately, that switch has proved to
be satisfactory so far; I am aware of no particular diffi-
culties with it.
Page 11-5
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
The problem presented to you as purchasing agent for
Podunk Hollow Homebuilts is to understand how all
this does or does not affect your decisions on selecting
and buying a switch. I am sure you have neither the
time nor an inclination to approach the task with the
energy, determination and budget of a NASA engineer.
First, let us address the issue of style. My personal
favorite is the standard bat handle for a switch opera-
tor. Reason: many manufacturers supply similar if not
identical looking switches in a variety of special func-
tions. These switches usually mount in a single 15/32"
round hole; they utilize a keyed and tabbed anti-
rotation washer for additional security in installation
and they install with a single nut. Switches with other
styles of handles are more limited in the availability of
special functions except by special order. Rocker
switches are the worst of the lot for mounting since they
require square cornered rectangular holes and two
mounting screws. The lowly bat handle can be spruced
up with colorful plastic booties. However, the choice is
yours . . . . I have seen some very snazzy looking panels
with rocker switches or multi color paddle switches on
them.
The next consideration should be directed not so much
at ratings as at the mechanical quality of a switch. The
best way to acquire some confidence in the mechanics
of a switch is to pick from well known manufacturers.
Microswitch, Cutler-Hammer, Potter and Brumfield
are a few good sources of many sizes of switches. C &
K, Cutler-Hammer and ALCO are additional choices
for miniature switches. A military specification number
builds some confidence in a switch's pedigree. The
reason for concentrating first on mechanical attributes
over electrical attributes is the fact that a hand operated
switch in the panel of an aircraft is more likely to fail
mechanically than it is to fail electrically.
Explanation: All credible manufacturers of panel
switches have electrical and mechanical ratings of in the
tens of thousands of operations or more. One hundred
thousand is not uncommon. How long will it take you
to put even 10,000 operations on any switch in your
airplane? Yet, most switches fail in service with a small
fraction of this number of cycles on them. Teardown
usually shows a mechanical failure; the electrical con-
tacts are still in good shape. In the laboratory testing
environment, the 50,000 or 100,000 cycles is applied to a
product in a short period of time. One operation per
second is 3600 per hour. Less than 28 hours are needed
to "test" a switch to 100,000 cycles. The telling stresses
on a switch in service are temperature cycles, humidity
cycles, vibration, etc. Over time, these stresses can be
harder on mechanisms than upon the contacts of a
switch.
Let's look again at electrical ratings. In the area of mild
overload, of say 50%, the effect is not going to be
inducement of immediate failure but one of shortening
of the electrical life. In the laboratory, the electrical
and mechanical Lives of switches are similar. So, does it
bother you a great deal that the way you are using a
particular switch might reduce its life to a paltry 10,000
cycles? The major switch contact killer is the inductive-
ly induced fire created in the spreading contact air-
space.
The next most common failure is induced by steady
state overload which produces a precipitous accelera-
tion toward self destruction. The phenomenon was
described in the section on circuit protection wherein
two pieces of metal which are normally in tigiit electri-
 -
cal contact with each other get just a little corroded.
The contact resistance goes up which increases the heat
generated at the contact. Corrosion accelerates due to
heating and the resistance goes up some more, the heat
increases again as a result and so on. Eventually the
thing catches fire and/or just melts down.
Except for the big electric heaters used in the Eze's,
and pitot tube heaters, no large loads are of the contin-
uous duty type. Landing gear motors, flap motors,
landing lights, etc. are intermittent, short time loads.
Switches used for these kinds of service are not very
prone to precipitous corrosion failure. There is a third
type of switching device failure, which usually happens
only to contactors, but we'll discuss it here.
The third switch failure mode is a bit more complex:
when working with large current flows in d.c. power
systems there is no practical way to reduce the arcing
at the contacts to zero. Some arcing will occur at time
of contact closure and again at contact opening. Arcing
at switch closure happens because of contact bounce (?
? ? Yes, bounce!). Imagine yourself to be 0.1 inches
tall. In front of you are a pair of contacts in a switch
designed for, let us say, 30 amps. These contacts might
be 0.1 inches in diameter, 0.05 inches thick and be
normally separated by 0.1 inches of airspace when
open. These dimensions scaled up to your normal size
might translate into 6 feet in diameter, 3 feet thick and
6 feet apart. Now, let's smack these chunks of metal
together so as to cause them to close a circuit and carry
current. Be assured that they will not stay in contact
with each other after the first closure. Nor perhaps the
Page 11-6
The AeroElectric Connection
second or even the third. This 'bounce' is present to
some degree no matter what the scale of the switch is.
I have personally documented as many as eleven sepa-
rate contact closures on some types of relays. All this
happens in tens of milliseconds and the air gap between
bounces is quite small; not much is happening here in
most cases but suppose we're trying to warm of the
filament of that landing light with each bounce putting a
107 amp pulse of current to the lamp! (There are some
bounce-free designs for switches and we'll talk about
them later.)
The next opportunity for arcing occurs at switch open-
ing time as we've discussed before. With tungsten and
resistive loads it is no big deal. However, if the load is
inductive all the excess energy stored in the magnetic
circuit of the inductive device tries to warm up the
contacts of our switching device with fires fueled by a
voltage which happily grows larger as the contacts get
farther apart. Again, if the contacts move rapidly and
their thermal mass is sufficient, the device can be
expected to work under its rated conditions for many
thousands of cycles. It is a matter of degree; the ability
to prevent arcing in the circuit versus the ability to
withstand arcing in the switch: a design trade-off
between expense and function.
So, if arcing is never zero, what are the consequences?
First, let us consider the characteristics of an electric
arc. If you ever get to look directly at contacts in opera-
tion on some open switch or relay, the color of the arc
is yellow-white to blue. These colors imply tempera-
tures on the order of thousands of degrees! No matter
how small an arc may be, some amount of contact
metal will be vaporized. When the metal molecules are
ripped off the surface of the contact by an electric arc,
they tend to loose a few electrons from their outer
shells and they become ions with positive charge, free
to roam about in the hot gasses of the arc. It is only
natural that they migrate toward the more negative
terminal of the two contacts and when they strike the
colder metal they stick and pick up their missing elec-
trons from the current flow.
If you recall a badly worn set of points removed from
an automotive ignition system, the contacts were never
worn evenly. They mated together when closed but one
contact would be fatter, perhaps convex in shape. It
would exactly fit into the concave surface of the other
contact. This is the most routine example I can think of
where the transfer of metal from one contact to the
other can be observed. In the case of manually operated
switches, this metal transfer phenomenon is seldom
PageSwitches, Relays and Contactors
observed. This is because switches as a class of device in
an airplane are seldom required to handle over 10 amps
of inductive or tungsten load for very many cycles. If
you ran a set of ignition points for 10,000 miles at 3000
revolutions per mile in an 8 cylinder engine, they would
have to make and break a 2-amp inductive load 120
million times! Not much arcing takes place at each
switching action but 120 million itty-bitty arcs can trans-
fer a substantial amount of metal.
Metal transfer is the culprit in another switch failure
mode. It works like this: suppose after many normal
operations of a particular switch some significant metal
transfer has taken place. A general form of the transfer
is for metal deposited on the positive contact to form a
little sharp topped micro-mountain only a few thou-
sandths of an inch high. Now let us suppose that on
some particular closure, this little mountain of metal
does not fall exactly into the valley on the other contact
and instead it hits on the rim. If the switch is carrying a
high inrush load like a motor or a large lamp, the tip of
the mountain, as a poor conductor of large currents,
becomes the welding material for sticking the two
contacts together! Contact closure welding is a phe-
nomenon most often found in large relays or "contac-
tors". Contactors are special switches; a topic of the
following few paragraphs. The starter contactor is most
likely to suffer contact welding although I have seen
battery, landing gear and flap motor contactors stick
too.
ROTARYSWITCHES
For a device which simply connects or disconnects wires
from each other, switches can be very complex too!
Take a look at the cam operated switches in a washing
machine or an automatic dishwasher some time. Air-
craft circuit designs seldom require such complexity but
there are a few cases where a simple toggle switch
won't do the job. The transmitter selector switch for an
aircraft microphone circuit is often actuated by twisting
a knob through three or more positions. This single,
rotary switch might control the interconnections of up
to 20 wires!
Illustrations of rotary switches are shown in Figure 11-
3. This figure shows an example of a rotary switch
section (sometimes called a wafer) and examples of
schematics representing a rotary switch. Switch sec-
tions are assembled on a shaft to any practical number.
At Hughes Aircraft about 25 years ago, I recall repair-
ing a test fixture wherein the fifth section in a
11-7
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
7
8
 6
9
 5
'
 Q
 '
11
 3
12
 2
Lc1ommon
TERMINAL
VIEW A
S
,}""!9',
'
 ·1 I?e
 ¢
90
 O'
 ¢
i00
 6L-~
"1,1 i rj
 1¶0
 t20 T Q2
 0?
 S
 S
S
1
S
L COMMON
L COMMON
TERMINAL
VIEW B
TERMINAL
VIEW C
MECHANICAL REPRESENTATION
OF ROTARY SWITCH WAFER
\
TWO SCHEMATIC REPRESENTATIONS
OF ROTARY SWITCH WAFER
SINGLE POLE, 12 POS
ROTARY SWITCH
'
Figure 11-3.stack of about 12 was burned. I was able to disassem-
ble the switch, remove and replace the burned section,
and reassemble the switch. Only ten connections out of
the 100 or so total were soldered to the damaged sec-
tion. You are unlikely to need many sections for an
application in your airplane. In a later section on in-
strumentation, well discuss the use of a rotary switch to
select from a variety of thermocouples for the meas-
urement of temperatures.
A subscriber told me of a trip to a local parts store to
purchase a rotary switch. The clerk asked if he wanted a
"shorting" or "non-shorting" type. He replied, "non
shorting, of course. Who would want to buy a shorted
switch?" The clerk didn't answer his question; the
reader asked me about it in a later telephone conversa-
tion. I explained as follows:
In some circuit designs, it is undesirable to have the
common terminal become disconnected or "floating"
during the transition from one position to the next. In
Figure 11-4 I have shown a series of views for the two
types of switches. Observe that the rotor in both series
of views is transitioning from position 4 to position 5.
The center views show mid positions. In vi¢w B, the
rotor tab is wide enough so that it makes contact with
PageRotary Switches.
the next position (S) before it breaks with the last posi-
tion (4). In view E, the narrow tab has already broken
connection with position 4 and has not yet made con-
nection with position 5. Most of the time, a non-
shorting or break-before-make switch is appropriate. In
some instrumentation or audio selector applications,
the shorting or make-before-break is used. Do not rely
on a schematic symbol to make definitive statements as
to the type of switch needed for the task. A bill of
materials part number or description in accompanying
text should be consulted to determine which type of
switch is recommended.
'MICRO' SWITCHES
There is a class of switches ordinarily referred to as
micro switches. These are plunger operated, single
pole, double throw switches like those illustrated in
Figure 11-5. To call every example of these switches
"micro switches" is like calling all copy machines "xer-
ox's." Microswitch is the name of a company that
pioneered little plunger operated basic switches and the
name sort of stuck. In the examples shown, a variety of
sizes and actuating systems are given. The devices in
11-8
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
7
 7
 _7
 /
8@
 0
 ,,6
 8
 6
 8©
 |oL, O:'
C,
 0
 0
9(µ, ' "¢"
 "" d?'5
9(8,,.
 I
 ' @S
 g ©m·
 'r ' ,>jS
T
 '"
/
 &
in= ,
 G)
 =4
 1 =
 Cl
 (= 4
 I
 ej "
 \,
 r""" \ "
 )7 "
 \ /
 = 4
~»'
 m, \
 ^1 jC? '.
 .
 "3
 ,,es
 ^@'3
 1 j(O '
 '
 ' R»3
r
 d
 ...
0
 (J
 O
 (J
 O
 'J
12 0
 0
 2
 12 0
 :
 2
12 L7
 0
 ?
1
 1
 "
VIEW A
 VIEW B
 VIEW C
\
A "SHORTING"
 TYPE ROTARY SWITCH
/
A SHORTING TYPE SWITCH WILL MAKE THE NEXT CONNECTION BEFORE
BREAKING THE LAST CONNECTION
 NOTE IN THE EXAMPLE ABOVE THAT
THE SELECTION TAB ON THE ROTOR IS WIDER SO TUAT IT CONTACTS
TERMINAL 5 BEFORE BREAKING CONTACT WITH TERMINAL 4, AS IT
TRANSITIONS FROM 4 TO 5.
7
 7
 7
8@
 0
 ,,6
 8
 0
 6
 8
 0
 6
CJ
 0
 C\
 lj'
9@,-
 -
 ' ¢jjS
 9@
 O 5
 9 Cj ' / \
 " '
 O 5
1 " = \\
 Ei
 / = 4
 1 n=
 CJ,
 = 4
 in=
 Oj
 =4
L.
1 |(g"' ·.
 '
 %3
 1 j9 "
 / "3
 1 1 O
 \
 %3
^
 \
I 2° tb' !
 'I?
 1 2 O
 0
 :
 \J
 "2
 12 O
 0
 0
 CJ
 2
I
 1
\
VIEW D
VIEW E
A NON-SHORTING ROTARY SWITCH
VIEW F
/
A "NON-SHORTING" SWITCH WILL BREAK THE LAST CONNECTION BEFORE
MAKING THE NEXT CONNECTION
 NCTE IN THE EXAMPLE ABOVE THAT
THE SELECTION TAB ON THE ROTOR IS TOO NARRCW TO CONTACT TWO
TERMINALS AT ONCE AS IT TRANSITIONS FROM PC'SITICJN 4 TO POSITION
5
Figure 11-4. Shorting versus Non-Shorting Rotary Switches.
Page 11-9
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
(0)
A
O
 O
it
 It It
VIEW A
,EO
r
'
m
*\
 ~
 °'
n
='O
 '
%,
 O,
,~,
 !
VIEW B
O
<±O
 '
*'
 ~
 °"
VIEW C
 VIEW D
MANY CIRCUIT DESIGNERS USE THE RIGHT
ANGLE 'HOOK' ON ONE CONTACT TO DE-
NOTE THE NORMALLY CLOSED CC'N'A"'
_©
 _—--
7
¢_
"
k
"o—i
.
O
O
i
VIEW E
VIEW F
Figure 11-5. Plunger Operated Basic Switches.
Page 11-10
The AeroElectric Connection
the illustration are approximately actual size. There are
some smaller as well as larger but these will take care
of about every application in a homebuilt.
A familiar application of basic switches is for limit sens-
ing in meChanisms. Applications include up and down
limit sensing in flap and landing gear systems. Other
tasks include sensors for unlocked canopy latches, open
baggage doors and sensing whether or not pitch trim is
in take-off position. Basic switches are often combined
with a pressure sensing diaphragm to fabricate an
under-pressure or perhaps an over-pressure warning
circuit. Small plunger or lever operated switches are
used to sense down locks on landing gear mechanisms.
"Three-in-the-green" on short final means that three
separate switches have been actuated and now show
that all gear mechanisms are down and locked.
Catalogs are available from Microswitch and others
which detail an uncountable combination of ways these
switches may be configured. It is unlikely that you will
need to order anything very exotic from a catalog list-
ing. However, the catalogs are invaluable for identifying
a switch's characteristics. You can probably find switch-
es suited to your needs in surplus catalogs, fly/flea
markets, etc. Most switches will be marked with the
name of the manufacturer and a part number. Manu-
facturer's catalogs will then help you determine the
electrical ratings, mechanical characteristics and special
features which may have been built into the switch.
They are not expensive switches when new. They are
built by the millions and regularly surplused by industry
in large quantities. Surplus outlets should be considered
good sources for basic switches.
Figures 11-6 and 11-7 give some examples of basic
switch application. In Figure 11-6, the switches are
wired to provide automatic shutoff of an. electric trim
motor, just before the mechanism reaches hard me-
chanical stops. In this example, the motor current is
low enough to allow the basic switch to carry motor
current. In Figure 11-7, an electrically extended flap
system is illustrated. Here the motor current is too
large to run through small switches so control relays are
added to the system. The pilot's panel operated switch
and the basic switches used as limit sensors may now be
rated to carry relay coil current (milliamps) instead of
motor current (tens of amps).
RELAYS AND CONTACTORS
This brings us to the next topic of discussion in this
PageSwitches, Relays and Contactors
section: relays and contactors are types of remote
controlled switches. A need for a remotely controlled
switch can arise from: (I) the current to be controlled is
too great to be carried by a basic, hand operated device
o' (2) a large number of circuits must be switched
simultaneously but the system design makes it impracti-
cal or impossible to bring all of the wires to a hand
operated switch location.
An example of multiple circuit switching can be found
in many VHF COMM transceivers (See Figure 11-8).
Pressing the microphone button closes a single wire
circuit which energizes the electromagnet of a relay. A
two pole, double throw DPDT relay inside the trans-
ceiver disconnects the comm antenna from the receiver
and connect it to the transmitter. At the same time, a
second pole disconnects power from the receiver and
applies it to the transmitter. The act of changing from
a receive to transmit mode may require the changing of
many more circuits than antenna and power. I remem-
ber the very unpopular chore of changing out the
transmit/receive relay on a particular FM Two-way
transceiver back in the '60's. The thing occupied only
about 2 cubic inches of volume and was buried deep in
the guts of the power supply. It had 12 wires attached
to it that were never long enough to allow clipping the
old relay out and soldering in a new one. The job took
over an hour! In that instance, 7 different circuits,
some with hundreds of volts on them, were switched
when the operator pressed one little button on the
microphone.
The most familiar form of contactor is that which is
used to control the airplane's battery and starter motor.
A contactor is really just a big relay but it has features
which make it unique and worthy of the name "contac-
tor". Some people call these devices "solenoids"; close
but no cigar. A solenoid is an electric motor; it imparts
motion to a mechanism when electrical power is ap-
pLied. Contactors are solenoid operated switches and
indeed, many starter engagement solenoids on automo-
biles also control the electrical side of the starter motor.
There are features which set a contactor apart from the
relay: first, the magnetic motor that actuates it is more
powerful than the one found in a transceiver's
transmit/receive relay. For relays, a few ounces of
force is sufficient to hold the contacts closed. A contac-
tor may require several pounds of force for reliable
operation. The form of the contacts is unique too. The
schematic symbol for the contactor suggests an electri-
cal conductor is bridged between two contacts as the
device closes. There are a couple of good reasons for
11-11
The AeroEiectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
~!A ::T
UP
PILOT'S
 A
ELECTRIC
TRIM SW
 V
TRIM
ON
l~-iL
TRIM ON LIMIT SW
NC
+TR1M ON
'1 F_mo
 '°"
®
TRIM UP LIMIT SW
NC
+TR1M UP
'I F-n,
 '°'
ELECTRIC
TRIM MOTQR
@
Figure 11-6. Basic Switches as Motion Limiters in a Low Current Motor Circuit.
^^q
)t,,:1
c"iL_~
/'>A
+FLAP+FLAPUP
ON
RAISE
FLAPS
RELAY
,
,
0
§tS9?5 PILOT'S
 P
 "P"l_~_
FLAPS
 O-A
ON
 pups UP L|MIY SW I
""%L_
O-"
FLAPS ON LIMIT SW
'"L—o
—cA
l
 LOWER
FLAPS
Rf|AY
Figure 11-7. Basic Switches in Combination with Relays.
Page 11-12
_
ELECTRIC
F|,AP MQTOR
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
VHF COMMUNICATIONS TRANSCEIVER
 I
>
~ RELAY T
RECVR
 1
 0 m
0
A
 0 A
,,,,,, :7tj
CS_CJ
HEADSET
VHF COMM ANTENNA
17
VHF COMM
C,^O
PUSH-TO-TALK
BUTTON
"""IC,,,,,,,,,,
Figure 11-8. Multiple Circuit Switchingthis approach to the design. One is simplicity. In re-
lays, a flexible conductor is often incorporated to make
electrical connection to a contact which moves. A flexi-
ble conductor rated for hundreds of amps isn't very
flexible! So, by using a movable contact to bridge
between two stationary contacts, the need for a flexible
conductor is eliminated.
b
The second reason has to do with contact life. Recall
that switches with a very snappy action have fast contact
spreading velocities and are able to break an arc before
it builds to intolerable heat levels. The massive moving
components of a contactor simply cannot be made to
"break" quickly. The problem is compounded when the
contactor is used to operate the engine starter motor
which is quite inductive and capable of storing consid-
erable energy in its magnetic circuits! The contactor
really has two sets of contacts in series. So . . . when
one of the contacts has opened to a gap of 0.050", so has
the other. The result is the same as though the contac-
tor had a single air gap of 0.100'. The series connection
has the net effect of doubling the air gap and the con-
tact spreading velocity on what is otherwise a slow
moving clunker of a contactor.
in a Transceiver with a Relay.
Contactors which you are likely to encounter come in
two basic forms illustrated in Figures 11-9 and 11-10.
For the sake of discussion we'll call these Type I and
Type II. Type I is a "trickle up" technology from
automotive and industrial applications. This contactor
has been used by the tens of thousands on Cessnas,
Pipers and some Beech single engine airplanes. The
contactor sells for under $20 from Newark and others.
This contactor has taken a lot of flack for its propensity
for failure and high cost of replacement at Smiley Jack's
Airdrome Services.
I've disassembled a lot of dead Type I devices over the
years. I can tell you that a goodly number of the contac-
tors I've opened failed prematurely from environmental
abuse of one kind or another. I've seen them rusted out
and/or water damaged inside. Some years ago, Cessna
went to a floating cowl for cabin noise reduction. The
gap formed by shock mounting the cowl allows rain-
water to run down the firewall. Cessna mounts a lot of
electrical hardware on the firewall. Their "fix" was to
seal things up with epoxy, silicon rubber, and other
sorts of uckum-yucky. Sealants are minimally success-
ful in these situations, a topic I will discuss in an upcom-
ing section on reliability.
Page 11-13
The AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
STATIONARY CONTACT FORMED
ON END OF TERMINAL POST.
MOVEABLE CONTACT DISK MOUNTED
ON END OF SOLENOID ARMATURE.
r"\
 "
ua i i
"
ti
rm
,
 "
e
 t.~.~.~.+.~...+j
 ,
'
)0 _
 J
,:"t
 TAKE CARE DURING
INSTALLATION TO
PREVENT TERMINAL
POST ROTATION WHILE
TIGHTENING TERMINAL
NUTS.
'&,, , ,=
 ,,, ,, , ,,,J
Figure 11-9. Type I Contactor Cutaway View.
'
MOVEABLE CONTACTS ARE MADE FROM
SILVER-CADMIUM ALLOY AND BRAZED
TO BUS BAR.
""""" " I ? }
r m 0 +0 m o~e m P ~0 m "¶
i
 i
P
0—A A-~0
!
 I
:
 i
 "
,
L
 ~ · B
 ~ · m
 ~ · ~W ~ 0 J
O
"
_
I—
 1
 ¶
1 ,,E'""°'^'"°"^'"^"
 m
-
 BRAZED TO SOLIDLY MOUNTED
"
 BUS BAR. RISK OF MISALIGNMENT
'
 DUE TO INSTALLATION ERROR IS
:
 ELIMINATED.
—
~
%,, ,,, ,=::, ,, ,,
 '
Figure ll-lO. Type II Contactor Cutaway View.
Page 11-14
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
Suffice it to say here that internal damage Fom water entry
is not an uncommon cause of contactor failure in Cessnas.
Another form of failure in Type I devices is precipitated by
the mechanic who installs a new contactor. Note that the
stationary contacts are fabricated on the end of the threaded
connector stud which penetrates the housing wall. If the
installer is not careful, the stud is rotated a tiny amount due
to overzealous tightening of the stud nuts. The resulting tilt
placed on the face of the stationary contact prevents good
mating with the movable contact. The reduced area of
contact precipitates early failure.
Earlier in this section I discussed switch failure modes
precipitated by contact heating which raises contact
resistance which increases heating which increases
resistance . . .. This precipitous slide to failure is
"lubricated" by moisture and accelerated by external heat
sources such as exhaust stacks.
The Type I devices that failed by just being tired had many
hours of service on them. My personal judgment of these
devices is that they will perform well if you (I) keep them
firom getting wet, (2) don't twist their arms too hard during
installation and (3) mount them free of radiant and/or
conducted sources of heat. An advantage of the Type I
contactors is their low cost. I would happily use them in any
airplane I built, and carry spares!
Type I devices have a catalog rating of only 70 amps.
Properly applied, they have performed well in systems
where they are routinely loaded to 200 amps during
cranking.
Type II contactors are "trickle-down" technology firom
military specified devices. The contacts are indeed an on
purpose, cadmium silver button designed for heavy duty
relay service. This is in contrast with Type I contactors
where a raw copper disk is mashed down on raw copper flats
machined into the terminal studs. Note too that Type IT
studs are independent of the contacts and interconnected
with them by a bus bar.
Type II contactors are available in ratings up through 400
amps--larger than you will ever need in a single engine
airplane! In fact, you could use 100-amp devices m either
battery contactor or starter contactor applications. The
contactors would be overloaded to some degree during
cranking but only momentarily and in6requently. If you are
interested in using Type II devices, check in the catalogs for
Cutler-Hammer 6041 series parts.
Relays and contactors have contact ratings much the same as
those of a switch. A fully specified relay or contactor may
Pagehave separate ratings for resistive, inductive or tungsten
loads. These devices must have a second rating as well for
their elecwomagnetic operating motor, sometimes called the
"coil" rating. Tjie coil rating may or may not have anything
to do with the rating of the contacts. For example, the relay
used to turn on the fan motor in your furnace or
air-conditioner may be operating on 24 volts AC for the coil
but the contacts will be handling 120 or perhaps 240 volts!
The relay or contactor is simply a remote controlled switch
and the controller may be rated to operate in an entirely
different electrical environment than the contacts.
When selecting a relay or contactor for a specific task in an
airplane, consider both the coil and contact ratings. The coil
will need to be rated at 12-14 or 24-28 volts D.C.
Important! . . . AC and DC coils are designed differently.
You cannot use a 12-volt AC rated relay coil in a I4-volt
DC airplane. There may also be a duty cycle rating on a
contactor coil. Relays are almost always designed to be a
continuous duty device. That is to say that there is no time
limit on how long the relay coil can stay energized. Some
contactors have over-stressed coil conductors to provide
extra pulling power without increasing the physical size of
the electromagnet. This is commonly done when the
contactor is expected to see very short ON times (such as for
engine cranking). The battery contactor, however, must
have a continuous duty rating since it must operate
continuously for hours at a time.
Contactors are &equent finds at surplus stores and fly/flea
markets. If you are considering a Type I which is not in its
original packing container and/or bears signs of having
been installed, I wouldn't give more than $5 for it. (Check
for circular scratches on the mounting ears and dings on the
nuts to answer the installation question.) If very clean
and/or in original factory packing then look for an
identifiable part number; a search in the catalogs will give
you the critter's pedigree. Now, suppose you have a pretty
clean, not rusted Type I contactor. Let us fiirther suppose it
shows signs of installation (scratches, nuts missing, etc.). S5
to $10 isn't much of a risk. If no catalogs are handy, an
ohmmeter check of the coil terminals will give a clue as to
its duty rating. On 14-volt devices, a coil resistance of 15
ohms or less suggests an intermittent duty contactor, suited
only for starter motor control. Coil resistances above 15
ohms suggest continuous duty rating on the coil. Double
these values for a 28-volt device. Many Type I devices have
only one coil terminal brought to the outside. This means
the other end ofthe coil is connected to a main terminal stud
or to the metallic case; your ohmmeter check will confirm
which.
Surplus Type II devices may be disassembled for inspection.
A cover over the relay contacts may be removed with simple
ll-lS
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
tools. If you can find clean surplus parts in the Type II
devices, they should be priced on the order of $30 or less;
new ones are $160 and up. 14-volt Type II devices &om
surplus sources will be rare since most were originally
purchased for 28-volt military vehicles.
THINGS YOU CAN DO WITH SWITCHES
Say what? Everybody knows that switches turn things on
and off. What's the big deal? I'd agree that most of the
switches we operate every day are simply a handy means of
opening and closing a gap in a wire. I'll add that switches
come in a variety of flavors. Aside horn the simple on/off
control 01[, say a light bulb, variations on a theme give us
handy tools to simplify a variety of switching tasks.
Table ll-l. AeroElectric Connection
S700-Series Toggle Switches
Dash
 # of
 # of
 Action
No.
 Poles
 Positions
 Keyway - Center-
Opposite
l-l
 1
 3
 ON-OFF-ON
1-2
 I
 2
 OFF-none-ON
1-3
 1
 2
 ON-none-ON
1-5
 1
 3
 (ON)-OFF-ON
1-7
 1
 3
 (ON)-OFF-(ON)
1-8
 I
 2
 (ON)-none-ON
2-1
 2
 3
 ON-OFF-ON
2-2
 2
 2
 OFF-none-ON
2-3
 2
 2
 ON-none-ON
2-5
 2
 3
 (ON)-OFF-ON
2-7
 2
 3
 (ON)-OFF-(ON)
2-8
 2
 2
 (ON)-none-ON
2-10
 2
 3
 ON-ON-ON
2-50
 2
 3
 (ON)-ON-ON
2-70
 2
 3
 (ON)-ON-(ON)
First, I'd like to introduce you to our numbering convention.
As we update schematics and power distribution diagrams,
we'll try to add more detail to a switch's description.
Adjacent to the reference designator number (SI, S2, S3,
Pageetc.) we'll include in parentheses the dash number out of
Table ll-l which describes the switch's number of poles,
number of positions and its action.
The left column of Table ll-l is the suffix to add to the
basic switch specification number. To fully describe a
switch you would precede it with the standards number
followed by the dash number appropriate to the action you
want For example, an S700-2-7 switch is a two pole, three
position toggle switch spring loaded to center &om both
extremes and having an (ON)-OFF-(ON) action. The
parentheses ( ) around an action label means the switch is
spring loaded to leave that position when released. Other
styles of switches (like rockers) will replace the "S700" with
mother number but the dash number to describe the number
of poles: number of positions and action will remain the
same.
BUSH NG KEYWAY
POSITIONED UP
SINGLE POLE
SWITCH
DOUBLE POLE
SWITCH
4Q ii
 6 5 ' d2Sk EB
 0 ® "@
 tgj CD 3
 2
 '
TCGC.LE SW'TCH TERMiNAL NUMBERING
Figure ll-l 1. Toggle Switch Terminal Numbering.
We'll standardize all our drawings to conform to the above
terminal numbering convention for switches. The mounting
for a toggle switch is a 15/32" threaded bushing with a
keyway cut on one side. Switch actions described in the last
column have keyway side positioning of the toggle first,
fOllowed by center positioning (3-position switches only)
and opposite side positioning on the right. For most
applications, switches are mounted with bushing keyway
oriented UP in the panel.
It is app'o-
 Q'c.i 25
 0.370
(7\C!.469 6^+
 [
priate
 tomention here
that
 toggle
 '
switches can
 !, '
 i
 \ /j r
be difijcylt to
keep tightly
 '_ /'
mounted
 in
the
 panel.
 Figure 11-12. Hole Layout for S700
This
 is
 Series Toggle Switches.
because
 it's
attached with threaded fasteners and you're always yanking
on its handle. You could use thread-locker to make the nuts
difficult to move after the switch is installed but this makes
11-16
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
the switch difficult to replace later.
The best solution is to take advantage of the anti-rotation
keyway washer and internal tooth lockwasher that is
supplied with all switches hom our catalog. The keyway
washer has two tabs, one to engage the keyway in the switch
bushing, the other to engage a 0.125"hole that you need to
drill in the panel, 0.37" above the 15/32" mounting hole.
The anti-rotation keyway washer installs firom the back and
will not protrude through a panel of .062" thickness or more.
Most panels have a placard to label the switches that will
cover a 0.125" hole. Inclusion of this hardware in your
installation will keep the switches right where you installed
them. Leaving thread-lockers out of the installation will
make them easy to replace should it become necessary.
By the way, you'll 6nd a 9/16" "Spin-Tite" or nut driver very
useful when installing or replacing toggle switches. I have
several that have been polished with crocus cloth to a very
shiny surface where it touches the panel. This little
modification to the stock tool assures you that it cannot
scratch your panel placard . . . even if it's plastic.
SINGLE POLE SWITCHES
l-l
 1-2
 1-3
J
 1
2 0
 'J: '"~"' 'I i:
I
l-S
 1-7
 1-8
'I 'i"l '1"Ki'
Figure 11-13. Family of Single Pole Switches.
Here's how the single-pole switches look in our schematics.
The symbols have a great deal in common but there me
differences that give you clues as to what kind of switch is
being called out . . . and how it works.
First;, I'd like to point out the ">" symbol between terminals
I and 3 of three switches illustrated in Figure 11-13. This
tells you that there is a center position that makes it a 3-
position device. Switches without this symbol are 2-position
devices. Note also that the moveable "am" of the switch can
be swung to make contact with either a solid dot ( 0 ) or a
solid triangle ( 'V ). The dot represents a sustained position
Pagefor the switch while the triangle represents a momentary or
spring loaded position.
Okay, 6 kinds of toggle switches . . . why would we want so
many and what would we do with them?
1 dash I, ON-OFF-ON switches are useful for selecting
either of two devices with a both off position. How about
having a landing and taxi light fixture share a single fuse or
breaker? Terminal 2 connects to the bus, terminal 1 might
power the landing light fixture while terminal 3 connects to
the taxi light.
1 dash 2, OFF-none-ON switches are useful for any simple
task of controlling nav lights, landing light, fuel pump, pitot
heat, etc. We don't stock this kind of switch because a 1-3
switch has the same functionality. If you want a 1 dash 2,
we can supply it to you. Note that the only "ON" condition
is with the toggle placed opposite the keyway. To use this
style switch for a landing light, you would have to mount it
keyway down in order to have the switch close when the
toggle is moved up. On the other hand, a 1 dash 2 switch
would serve nicely as a magneto switch. Unlike landing
lights, magnetos are "ON"when the switch is open. I've
included them in the family tree of switches because they do
exist.
1 dash 3, On-none-ON switches select either oftwo circuits
but doesn't permit both to be off. Obviously, terminal 3 of
the 1 dash 3 switch can be ignored when the switch takes on
simple tasks of the 1 dash 3 style switch described above.
Since connection is made at both extremes, you could use a
I dash 3 switch to use a single fuel gage to monitor either
right or left-hand fuel tanks. Or how about switching a
single dimmer between to lighting loads, say a map light and
an overhead flood?
.
1 dash 5, (ON)-OFF-ON switch has one position spring
loaded to center, the other is a sustained position. One
application that comes to mind would be an ignition-start
combination switch for an engine like a Rotax. Terminal 2
would be connected to ground. Terminal 3 would ground the
ignition in the down position (kill the e engine), leave the
ignition 6ree to function m the mid position, and operate a
ground-to-energize starter contactor m the up position.
Here's a first example of getting a single switch to do two
separate but related functions. I've had some builders use
the 1 dash 5 switch for electric flaps where a single action
selects fully "extended" flaps but the spring loaded "retract"
operation is conducive to milking the flaps up during a go-
around.
1 dash 7, (ON)-OFF-(ON) switches have momentary
throws both sides of center. This action might be used for
11-17
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
electric trim operations where momentary blips to either
direction of trim are desired. On of my Defiant builders
plans to use a 1 dash 7 switch to control &ont and rear
starter contactors Hom a single switch.
1 dash 8, (ON)-none-OFF switches have a sustained and
momentary contact at either extreme of two positions. The
1 dash 8 action could be used to replace a push-button
where terminals 2 and 1 are used to momentarily operate
some device (like the starter contactor).
TWO POLE SWITCHES
'7 _ C'
4—
2-3
2-8
I
7
"~'
'"L~6'->j:'tj:
'-ti:'<:
?— 1
 2—5
 7—7
·-0
 ·4
 ^1
2
 > 1
 2
 > 1
 2
 > ,
3
 3
 ^-0 "
'~C: '~',1: ' j;
2- i 0
 2-ZiC
 t
 2- 7C
'>S>S'
 'g
 I
"<ir"4il" 'ij
Figure 11-14. Family of 2-Pole Switches.
behavior. When a 3-position switch has more than one
pole, small changes in the transfer mechanisms can yield
some unique functions.
I don't have applications for all of the switching actions
depicted but here are a few that I've used in the past. Some
of these are also shown on our power distribution diagrams
and wire-book examples.
2 dash 3, On-none-ON is a common part number we stock.
This device is recommended for combination battery-
master/altemator-field switching. MUCH less expensive
than the popular but unnecessary "split rocker" found on
many certified ships, the 2 dash 3 works quite nicely in this
position. The 2 dash 3 also serves nicely as a magneto
switch. You can use terminals 2 and 3 to kill the magneto in
the down or OFF position. The other pole is used in series
with the second magneto switch. Properly wired, you can
disable the starter except when the impulse coupled magneto
is ON and the non-impulse coupled magneto is OFF. Use of
toggle switches with a starter lockout feature eliminates the
kickback hazard inherent with the key-type OFF-L-R-
BOTH-START switches found on most certified single
engine ships. Furthermore, toggles are easier to mount and
much less expensive than the key-switch. The big bonus of
using toggles comes when and if you replace either or both
magnetos with electronic ignition. The existing toggle is
"electronic ignition ready."
2 dash 7, (ON)-OFF-(ON) is commonly found in trim or
flap systems that use permanent magnet motors. When wired
as shown below, the 2 dash 7 reverses polarity of power
applied to the motor to reverse its direction.
/
"\
2-7
V
I '
e..
5
" W
,,)~,
J
 '."-'
,?)rm
i
 ',
t"'
I C.
\CJ PNL
Figure ll-lS. example of a 2 dash 7 Switch Application.
Wow! wouldja look at all those two-pole devices! You'll
recognize the first 6 as close cousins to the single pole
devices shown earlier. We've simply doubled up the
mechanism so that two switches side by side share the same
The spring loading to center firom both extremes makes it
easy to "bump" the switch for small trim changes.
Page 11-18
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
RX AUDIO
COMM
/ ,
 i
 X
'1'^
NAY 2
NAV 1
HEADPHONES
,J
2— 1 0 ,
1
2
 1
:
 " 03
I
 " 0
5H
 I - 4
06
m
 NAY 1
 AUDIO
m
 COMM AUDIO
m
 NAY 2 AUDIO
Figure 11-16. Example of a 2 dash 10 Switch
Application.
2 dash 10, ON-ON-ON. Here's an interesting example of
how you can wire a 2 dash ID switch to implement a single-
pole, three-position action. In the drawing above, I show
how a headset can be switched individually to any of three
audio sources. Incidentally, four pole switches are available
in the dash 10 configuration so that you can implement a 2-
pole, three-position configuration.
LANDING
LIGHT
7 '" ,)'
TAXI
OFF
5\SR>>
2- 10
"
 , '
 '
 LONG LT
' ' i @rj
TAXI LT
Figure 11-17. Example of a 2 dash 10 Switch
Application.
control landing and taxi lights Hom a single switch powered
Hom single source.
NAY
LTS
Dtrobe
OFF
STROBE
"
 2-10
2..,. j1
 Gj->
5\9D"
5\9D>
 ':.2 ,Zj,,, "
m~'
Figure 11-18. Example of a 2 dash 10 Switch
Application.
Another space saver for switch panels uses a 2 dash 10
switch to control both strobe and nav lights. The first
position brings up the strobe lights while the second adds
nav lights. Each lighting circuit has its own power supply
and circuit protection.
MAG
START
CON
OFF
t)
 > '° '^""°
2
 50
2 I
 I
 1
"
 )
 ;jr"
p '° "^""
5
 , L:
 CONTACTOR
5\SE>>
I
Figure 11-19. Example of a 2 dash 50 Switch
Application.
ShuMe the wires a little bit on a 2 dash 10 and you can
 Here's a way to combine magneto switching with starter
Page 11-19
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
control. Using the 2 dash 50 in this
configuration makes it easy to
change out magnetos for electronic
ignition at a later date. Just use
terminals 1 and 2 to control DC
power to the ignition system.
L
 2AWG
FUSE LINK
22AWG
E,
= Ie
 IS
.=~ ga ?
4-pole versions of these switches
 T
follow
 the
 same
 numbering
?
conventions. The need for a 4-pole
S
 "
 S3,,-,,
device is pretty rare but a 4 dash 10
ESSNTLswitch could be wired as a 2-pole, 3-
 \\1/
 ALT FEED
position transmitter select switch or
perhaps for load monitoring and to aux use alternator volts, a single main load.
 instrument
 alternator
 ="
Virtually all applications I've had for
 Figure
4-pole switches were some small
signal application where a miniature toggle was called for.
We may not stock these soon but if you need one and have
trouble procuring it, we'll be pleased to assist.
FUN PROJECTS WITH CONTACTORS
Battery Master Contactors - everyone needs at least one.
The ship's battery is capable of serious output of hundreds
of amps - way too much to manage with manual switches.
Primary conuol of batteries is delegated to the battery
master contactor. Figure I 1-20 illustrates typical battery
master contactor wiring. Note that I've shown a 3-terminal
contactor, but it could just as easily have 4 terminals. In this
case, coil terminal has been internally wired to one of the
large terminals. Many times the large terminal will be
stamped "BAT" by the contactor manufacturer. If you use
a 4-terminal device, you'll have to provide your own jumper
between the upper coil terminal and the always-hot battery
terminal.
A battery contactor needs to be a continuous-duty rated
device. I.e., being energized for hours at a time doesn't
generate so much internal heat Eom the coil that it raises its
temperature to destructive levels. Note that I show the
battery master contactor being controlled simultaneously
with the alternator field circuit using a 2 dash 3 style switch.
The"traditional" split rocker switch used on most certified
single-engine airplanes for controlling DC power offers no
particular utility or advantage.
Note also the use of a diode across the contactor's coil
terminals. Contactor coils are inductive devices. When the
energizing circuit is broken, the magnetic field collapses
very rapidly (see Kettering ignition discussion in Chapter 6).
If allowed to progress unrestrained, the voltage spike
MAIN EIATTERV
CONTACTCR
T =" T
'
TO STARTER
)
 S 1
 DC POWER
_ _ _J
 E
 (2-3)
 m^S'ER
a
 ' ,
 n,w,_>
22AWG
 2
 3
ALT FLO
*,~< 5A
 I
 ~2CAWG -A TO REGULATOR
""N'^— '°^"'_~~,
BUS
 > q.
 \"
 ,n'x
 I
>&
DIODE POLARITY MARKING
I) >>m
1 !-20. Battery Master Contactor Wiring.
generated by this magnetic field collapse can be hundreds of
volts in amplitude. The use of a diode catches this spike and
keeps it 6rom eroding the contacts of the master switch. It is
a popular belief that diodes wired in this manner are
protecting avionics and other Eagile devices Fom the
ravages of contactor coil spikes. Actually, these spikes are
very low energy and easily filtered off by power input
conditioning built into all modem avionics products. The
device at risk firom potentially high voltage discharges is the
battery master switch. Repeated breaking of the unrestrained
inductive load will erode the switch's contacts.
Until Revision 8 to this book, I've recommended metal oxide
varistors (MOV) as "spike catchers." I liked them because
they are AC devices and work well connected in either
direction - you can't hook them up backwards. However,
they're not a commonly stocked item with electronics
suppliers in the voltage ratings needed for 14V systems.
Diodes are very easy to obtain and the only caveat in their
use is to observe the polarity of the device as compared to
its schematic symbol. These are illustrated in Figure 11-20.
One further item to point out: note that there is no circuit
breaker associated with the control circuit of a battery
master contactor. This is because there are no failure modes
that would burn the wire. Opening the wire simply causes
the contactor to fail to function. A grounding of the wire
causes the contactor to be continuously energized . . . it will
certainly run the battery down but it doesn't put the wire in
jeopardy. This is in contrast to the other circuit which
shares a DC Power Master Switch - the alternator field
circuit is supplied Hom the bus. Faults on this wire are quite
capable of smoking the wire . . . besides, this is the lead that
gets deliberately faulted by a crowbar OV module . . . we
always put a breaker in this line.
Page 11-20
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays md Contactors
Starter Contactor wiring shown in
STARTER
 STARTER
Figure 11-21 is typical. Note that this
WARN
 CONTACTOR
circuit way of does a get breaker circuit or protection fuse. This
 by
 a m
 ~ "i J_ 7
particular contactor is also a 3-
 ALTERNATOR B-LEAD t
 '^W' ^
 '
 '
 (S)
terminal device with one side of its
 BATTERY CONTACTOR $
 2AWG
 "sj7 C !
solenoid coil grounded to the
 :
 E
mounting base. Unlike the battery
 C\1
contactor that needs a GROUND to
operate, the starter contactor needs a
 L__ _ _J
SOURCE of power.
 When
~1
 PUSH TO
mounted on a metal firewall, this
START
contactor gets an operating ground
 STARTER
 V
from the firewall. If you mount this
 Sz,µj_,,,,,
 0 A
 aL~20awg—
contactor on a nonmetallic and/or
ungrounded separate to the most wire convenient surface, Hom a mounting you'll power need ground
 bolt
 a
 -J"
 'r'
in the airplane.
 Figure 11-21. Typical Starter Contactor Wiring.
Note also that this contactor has the diode INSIDE the
symbol . . . the new line of starter contactors we're stocking
has spike suppression diodes built right in. Ithink this is a
trend for future products Hom most companies. However, if
you're in doubt as to the existence of a built in diode, go
ahead and put one outside . . . there's no problem with
having two diodes . . . lots of problems with having no
diodes!
Our starter contactors have a fourth, smaller (8-32 threaded
terminal). Many starter contactors do. It's generally marked
iR:
n"
AZ
m
/
 /
 / /1
 r
ZZ"/-
M
4AWG
T
 CROSS-FEED
 CONTACTOR
r6~'
,¥
7z /
.ii'
iE'
t!f ?:^"
"'a t^—20AWG
 ~
 I
 " "1
 |ZOONSTTA^CRTTO£RR
7"/
 CROSSFEED
 2
 ' i
 "
 S3 (2-7)
'^" 7
 /
 WARN
 I) 5)7,aw,_>
 I
 ~3
 CROSS-FEED
 STARTER/
, C\1
 K
 ·C
 'i-l i
C-d
 I
22AWG
 .
)
V
Figure 11-22. Crossfeed Contactor Wiring.
Page 11-21
 8-98
AeroElectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
"I." This terminal becomes "hot" when the contactor is
 Ground Power Contactors are left offmany ground power
energized. If you'd like to have a "Starter Energized"
 receptacle installations. Here's why I think they're a good
warning light on your panel, you may bring a 5A inline fuse
 idea. Referring to Figure 11-23 note that I show a contactor
offthe "I" terminal and route it to an indicator lamp on the
 in series with the main power between the receptacle and the
panel. Should the starter contactor or its operating button
 battery. This gives the contactor command and control over
become stuck, the lamp will remain illuminated after you
 any power source connected to your airplane's electrical
take your finger offthe button.
 system. Note that with the GROUND POWER switch-
breaker closed, the ground power contactor will energize
any time power is present on the receptacle . . . provided it's
Crossfeed Contactors are useful when you have
 the right polarity. The contactor is prevented Hom closing in
independent DC power systems that need to share resources
 case of accidental reversal of ground power polarity by a
firom time to time. There's a dual battery, dual alternator
 diode in the lead between the receptacle's small sense pin
diagram in Appendix Z that features a system crossfeed
 and the contactor coil terminal. Polarity reversal accidents
contactor. An excerpt Hom that diagram is shown in Figure
 are most common with battery carts that routinely receive
!1-22. Here's another application for the diode bridge
 maintenance that requires unwiring and rewiring a stack of
rectifier you see in many of my wiring diagrams. Here we're
 batteries.
able to make use of all four diodes in the assembly. Note
that a diode Hom the main and aux bus sides of the
 Another feature of this circuit is inclusion of a crowbar
crossfeed contactor supplies power to the upper coil
 overvoltage protection module across the coil. This feature
terminal. This means that EITHER bus may be used as a
 is useful when the line boy puts 28 volts to your 14 volt
power source to get the contactor closed.
 airplane. It's an easy mistake to make: it has happened to
me. An OV condition trips out the switch breaker on the
¶
 panel. The switch breaker is useful because it puts control
In this design, I show a 2 dash 7 switch wired so that when
 of ground power in the hands of the pilot. If for any reason
you press the switch to the upper, spring loaded position,
 you want power removed, you have only to flip the switch.
you energize the starter contactor with power Hom the main
 Further, it cannot be put on the airplane until you're ready to
bus. At the same time, we close a ground to the lower coil
 allow it.
terminal ofthe crossfeed contactor causing it to close. This
places both batteries in parallel for better cranking capacity.
When the engine starts and you release the switch, both the
 I like to tie ground power directly into the battery as shown.
starter and crossfeed contactors lose power and de-energize.
 This feature allows you to charge a dead battery without
If you trace out the circuitry carefully, you'll find that the
 removing it Hom the airplane and without powering up any
remaining two diodes are in a position
to serve as "spike catchers" for the
GROUND PWR
crossfeed contactor's coil. Crossfeed
 RECEPTACLE
contactors should be rated for
 GROUND PWR
 BATTERY
continuous duty.
 '°-'0!9'7
 rs°-Ef!!?'7
 t
0
 I
 e ": . ®
 ,AW,
 · ·
 t
In case of alternator failure on either
 I
 I
 L
 2AWG
 / I
 1
the main or auxiliary bus systems, the
 0
 !, ":g'"|'fye
 CROW- RED
 I
 !
 I
 '
 ?
Starter/Crossfeed in the lower, maintained switch can be position
 placed
 I Ejt
 'i
 A
energizing ONLY the crossfeed
contactor. This allows power hom the
 :
 /t"
 '
Ml-up bus to flow to the bus with the
ailing alternator. Similarly, should the
battery contactor fail on one bus,
 D
Z
closing the crossfeed contactor places
'^'=J
 f
a good battery on both busses. Even
when the paralleled alternators don't
evenly share the ship's loads, they're
\
 .
both available up to and including
Figure 11-23. Ground Power Contactor.
their full capacity stabilized by the
remaining good battery.
Page 11-22
 8-98
AeroEjectric Connection
 Switches, Relays and Contactors
of the airplane's electrical system. I show a 4-terminal
contactor in this application. Further, a continuous duty
contactor is appropriate for this service.
CONTACTOR INSTALLATION CONSIDERATIONS
Aside &om the obvious caveats mentioned earlier,
contactors can be mounted about anywhere. Battery and
ground power contactors should be close to a battery. Starter
contactors should be close to the starter.
There's an ol' mechanic's tale out there about installing your
contactors so that in-flight g-loads don't cause unintentional
contact closure. Seems an airshow hot-dog landed to
discover a smoked starter and a chewed up ring gear. The
theory advanced at the time was that maneuvers during his
performance caused the starter contactor to experience
tentative closures causing the contacts to weld shut.
I'll suggest that the starter contactor welded when he started
his engine. Without a "starter engaged" warning light, he
' flew the entire performance with a starter shucking out little
bits ofmetal. How does this story influence what we should
do as designers and builders of the world's finest single-
engine airplanes? Not much. First, battery contactors are
always closed in flight; g-loading--if it ever was a factor--is
not a factor here. Ground power and crossfeed contactors
are not subject to welding if subjected to momentary,
unintended closures. The starter contactors we stock and
recommend have an operating axis that usually mounts on
the firewall with its operating axis at right angles to
aerodynamically induced g-loads and are immune to this
influence. Last but not least, if you plan to do advanced
 ,
aerobatic maneuvers in your airplane, there are lots of
system issues to be considered. . . get the advice of someone
who does it for a living!
Ifyou are looking for something worth worrying about in the
design and maintenance of your electrical system, I'll
suggest that knowing your battery's capacity throughout its
service life is much more deserving of your undivided
attention.
Page 11-23
 