WU'e SelectionThe concept of using wires to provide a path for elec-
trons to flow from a source to· some remote load where
the work is to be done is pretty well understood. The
following discussion on wire will cover the selection of
wire sizes, wire forms, and appropriate types of insula-
tion for various tasks.
THE ANATOMY OF A WIRE
A trip through the wire catalogs will reveal a plethora
of wire sizes and types as well as cables made up from
bundles of individual wires. There are hundreds of
military specifications written for the purpose of de-
scribing and obtaining special and perhaps not so
special wires for specific tasks. Wire has experienced a
myriad of evolutionary stages over the last 50 years.
Actually, the basic wire is pretty much the same but the
insulations which cover the wires have evolved a great
deal. Indeed, insulation is still the arena where great
strides will be made in reducing the size an electrical
system installation.
 Weight will not be greatly im-
proved upon; the copper conductor is already the
major proportion of the weight and there is simply no
practical way to do with less copper with current
technology.
Most wire used for interconnection in a vehicle will
start with a core of pure copper. The metal is relative-
ly cheap compared to materials which conduct better
than copper. Silver is probably the only pure metal that
is equally suited mechanically and conducts better than
copper. If anyone is really interested in wiring their
airplane with silver wire, I can put you in touch with a
manufacturer who would be delighted to sell you what
you need! For the rest of us po' folk, copper will
remain the material of choice. There is no material
more economical than copper for any given wiring task.
Some brief flirtations have been made with aluminum
conductors for wiring in both the aircraft industry and
in wiring houses with mixed results. Aluminum is less
expensive than copper but it does not conduct electron
flow as well as copper. However, even when the size of
the conductor is increased to compensate for the
higher resistance of aluminum, the weight of the in-
stalled aluminum conductor is still less than for its
electrically equivalent copper counterpart. This tanta-
lizing fact has prompted a number of engineers to use
aluminum battery cables in airplanes manufactured by
both Piper and Cessna. I am aware of no such at-
Pageand Install~tion
Wire Selection and Installation
tempts at Beech or Mooney but I'm sure that they have
at least considered the possibilities.
The majority of factory installed aluminum cables have
now been replaced and for one basic reason. Alumi-
num suited to the manufacture of wire has to be very
soft. Soft aluminum will readily "work harden" when
stressed beyond its elastic limit causing it to become
brittle and subject to cracking. The connectors that are
crimped onto the wire cause the metal to be upset in
compression and the first beginnings of material work
hardening take place. This makes the terminations
sensitive to both vibration and corrosion. In a few
cases, the aluminum wire installations were not ade-
quately supported along their installed length and
vibration began to work harden the conductors during
the airplane's first flight hour. The hassles of maintain-
ing good termination quality and preventing conductor
failure under vibration has proved to be not worth the
effort for the few ounces of weight savings. The metal
airframe itself has proven to be the only conductor of
electrons that could be suitably made from aluminum.
FABRICATION FOR SURVIVAL
The form the copper takes may vary from a single,
solid strand to a twisted combination of many fine
strands of wire. Most houses are wired with solid wire,
while the wire used in the cord for a hand tool like a
drill motor or electric iron is finely stranded. The
reason for this is FLEXIBILITY. Along with flexibility
comes a resistance to breaking from being flexed. The
logic for this can be understood better by looking at
Figure 8-1. I have shown two diameters of copper wire
wrapped 360 degrees around a quarter-inch diameter
rod. The larger strand of wire is 10 gauge wire having a
diameter of 102 mils (102/1000 of an inch or 0.102").
The smaller is a 22 gauge wire having a diameter of 25
mils or 0.025". When you bend any material, the side
of the material that faces the inside of the bend is in
compression while the side that is outside the bend is
in tension. The stresses in the material are variable. As
you move inward on the bend radius, tension stresses
go down until at some point inside the core of the
strand, the stress is zero. The stress changes to com-
pression from this point and rises in magnitude until
the maximum compression stress is encountered on the
inside of the bend where the strand is in contact with
the rod. In the scenario depicted, let us assume that
the stress in the 10 gauge wire is zero exactly in the
8-1
The Aero-Electric Connection
center or 0.05" off the surface of the 0.250" rod. The
circumference of the circle through the center of the
wire is pi times 0.350" or 1.01"inch. The circumference
of the rod is pi times 0.250" or .785". The circumfer-
ence of the circle at the outside of the wire is pi times
0.450" or 1.414". In this example we have taken 1.00
inches of wire and caused reduction of length in
compression of 23% on the inside and a 41% extension
of length in tension on the outside. Copper is a very
ductile material. The initial formation of a piece of 10
gauge wire around the quarter-inch rod will result in
very little loss of structural integrity in the copper.
However, copper too will work harden. If you bend and
unbend the strand a few times, the ductility goes down
and cracks will begin to appear in the surface. A few
more bends and the cracks will go all the way through
and the strand fails. Let's suppose we wanted to make
an equivalent wire in an electrical sense by twisting say,
19 strands of a smaller wire together. Why 19? I'll get
to that later. It so happens that if I combine 19 strands
of 22 gauge wire in a bundle, I will have about the
same cross sectional area of copper as a 10 gauge wire.
Suppose we bend a 22 gauge, 0.025" diameter wire over
the same quarter-inch rod. This yields circumferences
of .785", 0.864" and 0.942" respectively. This means
that a 0.863 inch piece of wire has been compressed
inside the bend for a 9% reduction and stretched
outside the bend for an elongation of 9%. As you can
see, a reduction of wire strand diameter produces an
approximately proportional reduction of stress in the
wire for the same bending scenario. The ultimate
example of flexibility and resistance to breaking from
flexing can be found in welder's cable wherein large
effective diameters of wire for several hundreds of
Amps of load are made from hundreds of strands of
fine wire.
Now that the utility of stranding wire for flexibility and
resistance to breakage has been established, let's talk
about that number "19". If you take a compass and a
sheet of paper and draw groups of equal diameter
circles around a central circle, you find that six circles
will just fit around the one in the middle and that every
circle is exactly tangent to any adjacent circle. This
illustrates the first common value of "7" for the strand-
ing of wire. Continue to add circles around this array
and you will find that twelve more circles fit neatly
around the first seven for a total of nineteen. This is
the next higher number found in the wire catalogs for
stranding. This discussion has been illustrated in
Figure 8-2. The exercise can be carried out many more
steps but for our purposes, 19 is enough. The smallest
wire used in airframe wiring applications is 22 gauge
PageWire Selection and Installation
which is made up from 7 strands of 30 gauge or 19
strands of 43 gauge. Of the two, the 19-strand wire is
much preferred over the 7-strand wire.
Okay, our best choice for wire thus far is to make it
from copper and to have at least 7 strands in its make-
up. The next layer up on our construction project is the
plating of the wire. Many automotive wires do not
bother to plate the individual copper strands before
twisting them together. If you cut away the plastic
insulation from the middle of an old battery cable
(some distance away from the corrosion caused by
migration of the acid under the end of the insulation)
you will note that while the wire is basically intact, it
may be a far cry from the bright copper that was used
to make up the cable. There are several reasons for
this.
First, copper is a very active metal. By 'active' I mean
that it reacts very readily with oxygen in the air com-
bined with moisture and the nasties that float around in
it. A copper tea kettle sitting in the open air of a
kitchen will last but a few weeks before needing anoth-
er pass with the copper polish. Second, when you
strand a wire, there is no practical way to totally seal
the air circulation from between the strands. Third,
most plastic insulations are not perfect barriers for the
protection of wire from the environment, especially
when hydrocarbons are present. The design life of an
automotive system is something on the order of 7 to 10
years. We build airplanes for much longer life spans so
using a plated wire under our insulation is in order.
Tin is the metal of choice. It is easily applied and much
more resistant to chemical activity than bare copper.
KEEPING THE "JUICE" INSIDE THE "PIPE"
The next layer up is the insulation. Here is where we
find the most striking evolution in construction over
the past 50 years. If you think vehicle systems present
some tough design situations, find a book in the library
on the laying of the first transatlantic cables. These
cables were laid by combination steamer/sailing ships
that burned wood or coal. Oil and the by-products
thereof were not around yet. Designing a conductor
for both electrical characteristics
 and mechanical
strength was difficult enough; covering the wire to
protect it from the salt water at thousands of feet of
depth was entirely another matter. The fibers available
were organic as were the sealers. Many layers of tars,
jute-like fibers and shellac in varied combinations were
tried. Millions of dollars of 1890's money were literally
dumped into the Atlantic ocean before the first really
8-2
The Aero-Electric Connection
Wire Selection and Installation
.2!S. DIAMETER ROO FORMS INSIDE OF
WIRE TO A aRCUWFERENCE OF .78S.
FOR A COUPRESSIONOF' 23X
ZERO STRESS UNE lHROUGH CENlER OF WIRE
FORI.tS A NOMINAL DIAMETER OF' .350· WHlat
WEANS lHA T 1HE ORIGINAL LENGlH OF' 'THE
WIRE WAS 1.01-.
lHE OUTERMOSTSURFACE OF lliE WIRE FORUS
A DIMtETER OF .450- Willi A QRCUMFERENCE
OF 1.41· FOR ANELONCAllON OF' 41"-
.2!S- DIAMETERROO FORMS INSIDE OF
WIRE TO A CIRCUMFERENCEOF .71S
FOR A COMPRESSIONOF 9S
ZERO STRESS UNE lHROUGH CENlER OF WIRE
FORMS A NOMINAL DIAMETER OF' .275- WHlai
MEANS THAT THE ORIGINAL l£NGlH OF 'THE YfRE WAS .884-
THE OUTERMOSTSURFACE OF THE WIRE FORMS
A DIAMETEROf' .300- 'MlH A QRCUMFERENCE
OF .942"" FOR AN ELONCAllON OF ex
Figure 8-1. Wire Stresses Versus Wire Diameter.
Page 8-3
The Aero-Electric Connection
 Wire Selection and Installation
WIRE7-SlRAND
CROSS-SECl1ON
19-5lRAND
WIRE CROSS SECllON
Figure 8-2. Common Layup ConfIgurationssuccessful cables were built and laid. I found the story
of the fabrication and laying of the fIrst transatlantic
cables fascinating; I recommend it to you for times of
poor flying weather.
The wires that are found on the early airplanes are a
product of the 20's, 30's and 40's when rubber was
extruded over the twisted strands. Cotton was braided
over the rubber and then sealed with a kind of shellac.
If any of you have been involved in the restoration of a
1940's airplane or automobile, you have had a fIrst-
hand experience with this stuff! Any of this wire still in
place today has become brittle and insulation may fly
off of the wire in little pieces when the wire is flexed.
The cotton over rubber insulations had another disad-
vantage. Being organic, fungi liked this stuff a whole
lot! Military equipment of the period had to be treated
with special fungicides to prevent death by athlete's
foot. The 50's and 60's brought us the petroleum based
plastics for insulation; much more stable with age and
they gave the fungi heartburn.
 Derivatives of these
materials are still around today in the form of PVC
plastics used in most appliance and automotive wiring
insulations. In the 60's, the wire of choice was insulat-
ed first with PVC and then a thin jacket of nylon was
extruded over it. This combination had a service life of
Pagefor Stranded Wire.
5 to 10 times longer than the cotton braid over extrud-
ed rubber. Military aircraft wire of this era might
include some synthetic fiber over-braids either as a top
layer over the PVC or perhaps between the layers of
PVC and nylon. This type of treatment provided addi-
tional abrasion resistance.
I made a statement about plastic insulations not being
a 'perfect' barrier for the protection of the wire inside.
A good example of the phenomenon can be experi-
enced fIrsthand: a piece of fIsh dropped into a ziplock
baggie can be detected by the nose from outside the
bag after a few hours of containment. Of course the
nose is a pretty sensitive instrument; it can detect
concentrations of some odors in concentrations down
to a few parts per billion. Another example of the
'porosity' of plastics can be found in laboratories where
precise amounts of some chemicals are to be dumped
into the otherwise healthful environment in a cage of
critters. A plastic tube containing the nasty stuff is run
through the sealed environment. If one knows the
make-up of the chemical and the plastic tube the
migration rate of the chemical through the walls of the
tube is very predictable. The dosage of the nasty stuff
given to the hapless critters is known and controllable.
This is the reason for the phenomenon I mentioned
8-4
The Aero-Electric Connection
previously: unplated copper wires will corrode in spite
of an intact layer of PVC plastic insulation!
Another breed of plastics was brought into the market-
place about 1960 and they all started with "TEFl. The
first was teflon and it was truly an amazing advance-
ment. The stuff stayed flexible and soft down to the
big minus temperatures and would not melt in 400-500
degree F environments either. The major disadvantage
was its abrasion resistance in that you could dig into
the material with your thumbnail. However, because it
was so slick, it was easily bundled inside pvc jacket for
general abrasion protection of multiwire avionics
harnesses. It was (and still is) expensive wire, partly
because of the need for silver or nickel plating the
copper before extruding the teflon over it. I'm not sure
of the exact reason but I believe it involves a reaction
between tin and hot teflon in the process which ex-
trudes the insulation onto the wire.
So much for history. If you were going to pick a wire
insulation for a new or restored airplane, the choices
are really rather few and happily so. But let's review
the requirements that we want to place on the wiring
insulation for an airplane. The most obvious applica-
tion of insulation is to keep the electrons from getting
out of the wire before they get to the other end! So the
first requirement is to prevent the wire from coming
into undesired contact with conductors of electric
current which includes other wires or metalic parts of
the airframe. The next requirement is that the insula-
tion must be durable to a suitable degree. A properly
installed wire should not be subject to much mechani-
cal abuse but just the act of installing a wire or wire
bundle can inflict damage to a poorly insulated wire.
Insulation creep-back or melting while soldering a wire
is undesirable. The insulation must have a reasonable
characteristic at temperature extremes. When subject-
ed to the lowest expected operating temperature, the
insulation must remain flexible enough so as not to
crack under stress; at the upper extreme, it must not
melt, deform or lose so much strength that the wire
migrates within.
Wire migration inside an insulating jacket is a rare
phenomenon but I have seen it happen. We had a rash
of OMNI antenna failures in a series of aircraft at
Cessna back in the early 60's. The problem centered
on shorted coaxial cables used to interconnect the
antenna on the vertical fin with the receiver on the
instrument panel. The cable routing called for a par-
ticularly tight radius bend of the cable through some
structure. This bend caused the center conductor of
PageWire Selection and Installation
the coax to put a stress on the insulation such that with
time, vibration, temperature cycles, etc ....
 the wire
slowly moved from its nominal center within the center
of the cable outward to the braided shield until it fmal-
ly penetrated the insulation and shorted. The process
took two to five years to occur. A change of the mate-
rial from which the cable was made combined with a
rerouted installation path cured the problem. Most
coaxial cables today use a stranded center conductor
which is very unlikely to migrate.
The last requirement is that the insulation should have
some longevity in the environment to which it is ex-
posed. This relates back to the design service life and
ideally your airplane should last forever, right? Well,
perhaps not but a goal of 20 years is not unreasonable.
There are few variations of environmental extremes
within the airplane itself. Wires routed through spaces
not in the engine compartment experience temperature
extremes ranging from the coldest to the hottest that
the weather and the sun can produce. Minus 40 to plus
180 degrees F is a reasonable range to consider for
these spaces. Wires in the engine compartment are
subject to radiation and conduction heating from
engine components that may take a wire to 300 degrees
F or more! However, it is usually not difficult to pre-
clude the possibility of this upper extreme. Resistance
to chemical attack is a factor as well. Wires can be
subjected to the effects of fuel, oil, hydraulic fluids,
deicer fluids, products of combustion, topped off by
cleaners and solvents used to remove dirt and oil. An
especially reactive addition to this recipe is ozone
which creeps out of the fitting on the ignition system.
PICKING THE WIRE SUITABLE THE TASK
The wire of choice today is insulated with a material
called "tefzel". The wire is put up for the military
under specification MIL-W-22759. Tefzel is a close
cousin to teflon. It proved to be preferable to teflon for
most applications due to its superior abrasion resist-
ance; you cannot dig into it with a fingernail like you
can with teflon. Its temperature rating is, I believe,
somewhat lower than teflon but there should be no
routing for wire in an airplane that will push tefzel even
close to its limits! MIL-W-22759 wire may be available
to you in assorted sizes and lengths from avionics
shops. However, MIL-W-22759 is not the only wire
suited to aircraft applications; it just happens to be the
wire of choice. Let's look at some options:
PVC insulated wires can be used quite satisfactorily in
most areas except the engine compartment. There are
8-5
The Aero-Electric Connection
two common types of PVC insulation available. One is
rated at 80 degrees C. The other, having been exposed
to intense radiation during manufacture is rated at 105
degrees C. The lower temperature wire is not quite as
tough and "creeps" away from a soldered connection
rather badly. If you plan to use only crimped connec-
tions, the lower temp stuff is okay. If you want to use
soldered connections (see section on wiring intercon-
nections) then the irradiated, higher temp variety is
recommended.
 Teflon wire may also be found at
reasonable prices through surplus dealers. Teflon
insulation is a little tougher to strip neatly. This job is
greatly facilitate by purchasing a pair of strippers with
blades specifically designed for stripping teflon.
Some extra care should be used in installing either
PVC or Teflon wires to prevent abrasion or localized
pressures on the insulation. Adequate support and
additional overwrap in potential abrasion areas will
take care of the first hazard. Localized pressure is a
condition that is not so well understood. Most plastics,
if kept under a constant pressure above a certain value,
will flow over time to relieve that pressure. The pres-
sure can come from some obvious source like bending
a wire bundle around a corner. Even if the bundle is
immobilized, a constant unrelenting pressure can cause
the insulation to flow from under the pressure point
and cause one or more wires to become uninsulated. If
that corner happens to be some aluminum structure in
a metal airplane, then the system supported by the
compromised wire will cease to function when the
breaker pops. Abnormal pressure can come from
other sources; some are pretty surprising. I have seen
string ties and the plastic tye-wraps applied so tightly to
a bundle of wires that the insulation on the wires was
extruded sufficiently to expose the conductors within!
Use some care and judgment when "immobilizing" your
wires lest you strangle them as well!
EXPLORING THE "UNKNOWN"
Suppose you have a spool of good looking wire in your
hot little hands and you would like to use it in your air-
plane. The spool bears no markings that would tell you
what the wire's pedigree is. You can tell some things
about it for yourself. First, strip back the insulation
and check the interior stranding. Is it 7 strands? Okay.
Is it 19 strands? Great. Is it a plated wire and not bare
copper. Is the wire indeed made of copper? It may
seem to be a silly question but if you shop around
military or industrial surplus outlets you should be
wary of unmarked or otherwise unidentifiable materi-
als; people have had all sorts of special weird wires
PageWire Selection and Installation
made. Now about the insulation ... Tin the strands of
the wire with a soldering iron and some solder. Does
the insulation crawl back from the hot end or drip? If it
doesn't melt with normal soldering procedures, try
touching the iron directly to the insulation. If it doesn't
melt then the wire is probably insulated with one of the
"TEF's". Soak a piece in Avgas or Mogas for a week;
does the insulation swell up or get soft?
If the stuff is obviously not teflon or tefzel, but all the
answers to the foregoing questions are ones you like,
then it's probably okay for everything except the hottest
spots under the cowl. I'll never forget an experience
about 23 years ago when I was moving with a pregnant
wife from Pittsburgh, PA, back to Wichita in the dead
of winter. I figured I'd do a tune up on the old '57
Chevy before we left just as a precaution against igni-
tion problems. Went down to the parts store and
bought the usual goodies. Then I saw "it"; a display of
beautiful red transparent ignition wires. What the
heck, the old harness WAS a couple of years old....
About a 100 miles down the road the car began to run
badly and smell worse! We nursed it into a little town
in West Virginia and opened the hood. The insulation
on the pretty red harness was dripping onto the exhaust
manifold, causing much smoke and letting all of the
sparks out of the wires too. Bought a new (and very
expensive) harness made of the ugly 01' black stuff; got
to install it in front of a parts store in the dark and in
the rain! Moral: If you don't know what kind of
product it is then find out ....
 before you put it on
your airplane.
Wires come in made up assemblies too. You can buy
spools of multi-strand cables with a jacket extruded
over the whole bundle. It's handy to be able to pull a
smooth bundle of wires that are already protected from
abrasion though the netherworld of structure under the
floorboards of an airplane as opposed to a hand made
bundle that is all lumpy with string ties or tye-wraps!
You can almost never fmd exactly the bundle you want;
made up from say, two 14 gauge wires, three 16's and
eight 22's. There is a way to make use of these pre-
bundled cables which I will describe later in this sec-
tion.
SIZING A WIRE TO THE TASK
There are two factors to consider when selecting a wire
size. To most folk, the first is pretty obvious. One must
consider the CURRENT that the wire will carry. The
second and not so obvious is the VoltAGE DROP in
8-6
The Aero-Electric Connection
the length of wire required for a specific task. Exam-
ple: 14 AWG wire used in house wiring is supplied
from a 15-Amp breaker. The implication here is that
this size is adequate for supplying loads up to the rating
of the breakers: 15 Amps. But suppose you wanted to
run a 1500 Watt electric heater in your hangar and the
hangar was 250 feet from the house. The heater will
draw 1500 (Watts) divided by 115 (Volts) which equals
13.1 Amps (See equation 4 in Figure 1-3 and solve for
Amps. While we are at it, let us solve for the resistance
of the heater. Use equation 5. Plug in 115 Volts 1500
Watts and solve for Ohms. I get 8.82 Ohms. More on
that later.) Ha! let's go get a box of 14/2 Romex house
wire and run it out to the hangar, it will carry 13.1
Amps with no problems .....
Looking at the wire data table in Figure 8-3 we see that
14 AWG wire has a resistance of 2.53 Ohms per 1000
feet. It is a 500 foot round trip to the hangar and back.
Then perhaps we need to add another 50 foot round
trip from the outlet on the back porch to the breaker
box. Let's see .....
 550 times 2.53 divided by 1000 is
1.39 Ohms. Adding that to the figure of 8.82 Ohms for
the heater, we get a total circuit resistance of 10.2
Ohms. Using equation 2, with 10.2 Ohms and 115 Volts
plugged in, we can solve for a new circuit current of
11.27 Amps. Using equation 1 again we can calculate
that the Voltage across the heater is 8.82 Ohms times
11.27 Amps or 99.40 Volts. Using equation 4 we can
calculate that the heater with 99.40 Volts at 11.27
Amps dissipated in it will generate only 1120 Watts.
There is 115 minus 99.4 Volts or 15.6 Volts dropped in
just the wiring! Using equation 4 again: 15.6 Volts
times 11.27 Amps is 175.8 Watts of power (or 13% of
the total) lost in the wire in spite of the fact that the
wire is not being overloaded!
Let's assume for this example that we were willing to
lose 5% of our energy in conducting it from house to
hangar. Looking at equation 6 in Figure 1-3, we note
that power is the product of Ohms times Amps
squared. If 5% of the total energy in the circuit is
allowed to be dissipated in the wire then we can say
that Watts dissipated in the heater is 19 times greater
than the Watts dissipated in the wire. Using equation 6
twice, we can say that 19 times the wire Ohms times
the square of the Amps of current is equal to the
heater Ohms times the square of the Amps. Divide
both sides by Amps squared and we are left with:
Heater Ohms is equal to 19 times the allowable wire
Ohms. Solving for wiring Ohms we get 8.82/19 = 0.46
Ohms.
Wire Selection and Installation
If our 550 foot run of wire can have a drop of 0.46
Ohms then a 1000 foot run of the same wire would
have: 0.46 divided by 550 times 1000 or 0.84 Ohms.
Looking in the table again we see that an 9 AWG wire
is smallest wire that will yield a resistance of 0.84
Ohms per 1000 feet or less. 9 AWG is not one of the
commonly stocked sizes so we would probably have to
buy 8 AWG In short runs inside a house, 8 AWG wire
can be loaded to 40 Amps! But because of Voltage
drop considerations, we need to use 8 AWG wire to
supply a 13 Amp load at the remote hangar location.
There is another lesson here ... suppose we were to
run 230 Volts to the hangar instead of 115. Would 14
gauge wire handle a 1500 Watt heater with less than
5% loss of power in the interconnect wiring? Does this
exercise suggest why a 28 Volt electrical system might
have some advantages over a 14 Volt one?
Remember the example of Voltage drop in the landing
light circuit in Section 1? The same reasoning was
applied to that case as the one we just did on the
hangar heater. Let's look at the wire table again and
see what it has to tell us. The first column is the AWG
No. which stands for American Wire Gauge Number.
Don't ask me why the 0000 and the 000 wires are in the
table that way. One would think that they could have
made the four zeros guy equal to AWG 0 and then
moved all the rest of the numbers
 down
accordingly.... zero, zero, zero what kind of number is
that? Especially for a BIG wire! Any how, the next
column is the diameter of the wire in Mils or l/loooth
of an inch. The next column is the area in "Circular
Mils" (??????) Here's another toe stubber. Note that
the circular mill area is the simply the square of the
diameter value in mils. Just to make life easier for
someone, somewhere, they decided that the area of a
wire didn't have to be expressed in real area by includ-
ing pi in the equation; just squaring the diameter would
yield a number that was PROPORTIONAL to the real
area. Good enough for the purpose of those who
would learn to speak "wire-ese" and confuse the rest of
the world. The fourth column is based on the real
cross sectional area of the wire and states the resist-
ance of a strand in Ohms per 1000 Feet. The last
column is also based on real world area and gives Feet
per Pound.
Note that the numbers for diameter apply to a solid,
single strand of wire. However, for a stranded wire to
be rated as 22 A WG it must have the same electrical
characteristics as 22 AWG solid wire. The total cross
Page 8-7
The Aero- Electric Connection
289
 204
 229
 162
 114
 325
 129
 144
 257
 182
 ---------
 274
 206
 162
 102
 345
 365
 413
 486
 5
 lOA
 12.5A
 146
 128
 100A
 7A
 meter
 64
 36
 81
 22A
 32
 664
 54A
 per
 CMA
 15A
 72A
 ---------
 current
 Crise
 40A
 30A
 10 9
25.2
 1
 7
 mp
 --,----------
 -_._---------
 Dia-
 12.8
 13,090
 ------ 41,700
 105,500
 16,510
 1,28.8
 Circular
 1,624
 3,257
 66,400
 20.0
 7.91
 3.13
 2.48
 31.8
 1.56
 6.28
 3.95
 15.9
 12.6
 ,110
 60
 9.98
 1.97
 0
 5.7
 6.1
 50.6
 ,583
 Pound
 ,530
 ,048
 ,022
 3,100
 3,700
 33,100
 11,600
 67,800
 2,600
 ,180
 6,250
 ,230
 Feet
 63.8
 80.4
 .98
 ,820
 .4.01
 .3
 ,380
 rea
 Deg
 323
 514
 _._------
 400
 Mils
 256
 203
 8.05
 per
 648
 5.06
 2.00
 10.2
 817
 404
 3.18
 161
 101
 2.53
 800
 1.26
 1.59
 6.39
 Ohms
 Feet
 642
 509
 128
 .1
 ------_._---
 per
 -----------
 .078
 .098
 .999
 .628
 .313
 .062
 .156
 .792
 .395
 .124
 .498
 .249
 .197
 .049
 ----
 1000
-
Wire Selection and Installation
-
Figure 8-3. Wire Table for American Standard Wire Gauges
sectional area of the strands must have a circular mil
area (CMA) of 642 or perhaps a little more. This
means that the resistance and weight of the stranded
wire will be the same as for the solid wire. The only
thing that is not the same is the diameter. A stranded
wire will be slightly larger in diameter than its single
strand cousin.
Here are some other things to note about the wire
table. First, every three steps in wire gauge corre-
sponds to a factor of 2 in the CMA of the wire. 13
AWG wire is one half the CMA and twice the resist-
ance of a 10 AWG wire. 19 AWG wire is one-half the
resistance and twice the CMA of 22 AWG wire.
Second, note that 10 AWG wire is almost exactly 1
miliOhm per foot. And last, note that 10 AWG has a
diameter of .1 inch. With these three facts committed
to memory, you now have a wire table in your head!
Suppose you were trying to figure the suitability of 16
AWG wire for some application. Since it is six steps
from 10 AWG its resistance will be four times that of
10 AWG wire or .004 Ohms per foot. If you are trying
Page 8-8
The Aero-Electric Connection
to figure a problem involving 18 AWG wire you know
that 19 AWG is nine steps from 10 AWG. Take one
half for every three steps .... 1/2, 1/4, 1/8 the CMA
and 8 times the resistance of 10 AWG or 8 miliOhms
per foot. Drop down about a third of the interval
between 19 AWG and 16 AWG resistance and you
have about 6.66 miliOhms per foot for 18 AWG.
Referring to the wire table again we read the real
number to be 6.39 miliOhms per foot. ....
 6.66 mi-
liOhms is good enough for estimating; amaze your
friends by appearing to have memorized the wire table!
Now, for picking a wire size I can tell you that no air-
frame system wire should be smaller in cross-section
than 22 A WG just as a practical matter for ease of
installation and mechanical durability. 22 AWG wire
may be loaded as heavily as 5 Amps. Therefore, the
breaker feeding a 22 gauge wire should be 5-Amps or
less. Figure 8-4 shows a graphical depiction of the
continuous load ratings for temperature rises of 10
degrees C and 35 degrees C of a single strand in free
space. I have taken the numbers for selected gauges
from the graph and included them in the data in Figure
8-3.
TWICE AS BIG DOES NOT MEAN TWICE AS
STRONG
Lets explore the term 'capacity'. A close look at the
numbers in the charts and graphs will show thatjust
because a wire has twice the cross section of another
wire, its capacity does not double. We know that no
wire has zero Ohms resistance, therefore, some energy
is lost as the flow of electrons run down the wire. The
energy lost comes off in heat. The ability to reject heat
is a function of the surface area of the wire which
grows in direct proportion to the diameter. The appar-
ent ability carry current grows with the area of the wire
which is proportional to the square of diameter. So as
a wire gets larger, its ability to reject the heat generat-
ed within does not go up as fast as its apparent ability
to carry current. Hence the circular mils per Amp
loading of larger wires is larger than small wires be-
cause the ultimate limit on a wire is its insulation and
environmental surroundings which are temperature
limited.
When the heating is tolerable, the wire does no
damage to its own insulation when operated at rated
capacity in its rated environment. PVC's are rated to
105 degrees C, tIter' types to 300 degrees C. The
numbers are valid for a single wire supported in still
air. Now, if we bundle some wires up such that some
PageWire Selection and Installation
wires buried deep in the bundle are pushed to near
their maximum ratings, we might find it necessary to
de-rate the wire further to avoid exceeding insulation
temperature limits. Figure 8-4 also shows a derating
curve for a 10 degree C rise in wire temperature. For
bundling wires the free air temperature rise current
ratings are often used to insure that the wire does not
overheat when buried inside a bundle of other wires.
Note that the rated capacity of a wire has only to do
with the safety issue of wire protection and does not
address any performance issues. Homebuilders may
indeed have to de-rate a wire to insure that suffIcient
energy is conducted to the far end to insure proper
performance of the powered device.
WHEN IS AN OVERLOAD NOT AN OVERLOAD?
Now that we've laid out the "rules" we can discuss how
and why they are sometimes broken. If you were to
run 10 Amps through a length of 22 gauge wire, does
this imply that you are going to come spinning out of
the sky trailing black smoke like the victim of a dog-
fight? No, specially if the wire is short for low energy
loss in spite of overload, well ventilated to control
temperature rise, or is subject to an overload for only
short durations. In fact there are specifIc cases where
short term overloading is designed into an aircraft
system and the excess losses are considered tolerable.
The starter cable in an airplane is generally not sized to
present an ideal situation with respect to energy lost in
the wiring. The starter cable carries current for only a
few seconds per flight and most designers will allow the
losses in this wire to be "excessive" by normal stand-
ards. As a rule of thumb, I would consider a drop of
1.5 to 2 Volts in starter system wiring to be a livable
situation if the cables are long and a weight savings can
be realized. Looking at the numbers for this situation,
suppose that the battery can deliver 200 Amps at 10
Volts and we'll say that a 2-Volt drop is to be experi-
enced in the starter wiring at this level of current draw.
This leaves 8 Volts for the starter to run on which will
probably get you a successful start in all but the coldest
weather. A two-Volt drop out of 10 means that 20% of
the energy available from the battery is lost in wiring.
Another 20-25% is being lost internal to the battery
itself! Remember from earlier discussions that the
battery is chemically a 12-Volt device and its inability
to deliver 12-Volts under heavy load is due to internal
resistance (read internal losses).
Necessity has been called "the mother of invention" but
I suggest that compromise is "the father of success".
The point of this discussion is that the rules are not
8-9
The Aero-Electric Connection
S S A 200
 50
 10 2
~~
 A0 0
 N 0
 M
 T
 U
 P N
 L C
 ~
 I 100 ~
5
 ~
 ---
 ~
 ..••....••..
 ~
 ....-
 ~
 .•...•.••• B --- ~
 ~
 @
 1..?0o"
 ~
 -----
.....-
Wire Selection and Installation
~
22
 20
 18
 16
 14
 12
 10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 o
AMERICAN
 WIRE GAUGE
 (AWG)
Revision -A-
 02-02-06
Figure 8-4. Wire Current Capacity Versus Wire Guage and Temperature Rise.
carved in stone and you as the system designer can
make some intelligent decisions as to when the rules
are bendable.
SPECIAL WIRES FOR SPECIAL APPLICATIONS
I haven't mentioned shielded wire yet and I won't go
into details in this section because shielding is part of
the topic on electrical noise to be thrashed severely in a
later section. As a portent of things to come I will have
you ponder this statement in the interim: "The magneto
wires are the only airframe electrical system wires
worth shielding and in their case, the shield will be
used in an unorthodox fashion. Only selected avionics
and instrumentation wires require shielding and these
should be disclosed to you in the instructions of the
manufacturer of the product to be protected." More
on this later.
WIRE BUNDLE FABRICATION
AND INSTALLATION
Looking though the airplanes at Oshkosh, one can fmd
many examples of ways to wire (or not to wire) an
. airplane. Some projects show up with neatly sculptured
wiring while others look like the web of a drunk spider
created in a hurricane. Both techniques are obviously
functional, at least to the extent that both airplanes
made it to Oshkosh! And to some extent, the spider
web is easier to modify: every wire is mostly visible and
accessible. But there are at least two good reasons for
taking the time to do it up tight. One is that it simply
looks better. If you have a hand-crafted fmish on your
airplane that you are particularly proud of, there's no
reason not to have neat wiring to go with it. The
second reason is more important. Consider the fact
that a single 22 gauge wire hanging in space between
two points is free to move with g-forces and vibration.
A single strand of wire is not especially strong by itself
when hung out in the breeze and is more vulnerable to
accident. A formed and secured bundle of wires yields
strength in numbers. A half inch diameter bundle of
wires may be made up of many strands of different
gauge wire, no one strand of which is very rigid.
However, the sum total of the wires is quite resistant to
flexing and individual strands are much less subject to
being snagged and damaged by accident.
Page 8-10
The Aero-Electric Connection
MAKE YOUR MISTAKES ON PAPER
In planning the various issues of The 'Connection,
there was a section to be devoted to the discussion of
schematics, wiring diagrams and general tips on wire
installation. Many of you are working on the electrical
systems installations now. So, what follows is a preview
of the material to be presented in greater detail in
follow-on issues of The 'Connection.
The first step in wiring your airplane is planning.
Certainly if you can make detailed drawings of your
intended installation, by all means do so. Perhaps no
drawings are needed if you can plan out the system in
you head but some sketches would be helpful to most
of us! Your wire drawings are most helpful in this
planning effort. I might make a distinction here
between schematics and wiring diagrams. Figures 7-7
and 7-8 are examples of the contrast between the two
kinds of drawings. A schematic is the kind of drawing
used most often in this publication; types of compo-
nents and their interconnections are depicted without
regard to the placement with respect to each other or
the airplane. The wiring diagram is most useful for
installation information while the schematic is the best
for acquiring an understanding of how a circuit func-
tions. You should make both types of drawings in
planning your electrical system and its wiring. A set of
schematics are planned for a later issue but for now,
begin with a loose leaf binder and make a schematic
for every individual system you plan to install beginning
at the bus. For example, you should end up with a
single page to describe the connections for the landing
light beginning with the landing light circuit breaker,
though the switch and to the fixture to ground. Show
any intended disconnects in the wires such as a wing
root connector to permit removal of the wing. Another
separate page should be used to describe the alternator
system with its two breakers, field switch, Voltage
regulator and o.v. relay. Still another page might have
the battery and battery master switch wiring. By de-
picting each system on its own page, anyone schematic
is relatively simple and one may be revised or replaced
without messing up a big, single sheet drawing. Until
schematics are published in The 'Connection, look
though a service manual for a single engine Cessna or
Beechcraft. These are good examples of what a book-
form schematic should look like.
After each schematic is done, pick wire sizes and
appropriate breakers for each circuit and give each
wire segment a number on the drawing, even if you
choose not to number them in the airplane. It is a good
PageWire Selection and Installation
idea to number the actual wires as well; close to where
they terminate at each end. The Digi-Key Catalog lists
rolls of narrow tape with the digits 0-9 for marking
wires.
Begin a wiring diagram over a top view sketch of the
airplane. For this you need a big piece of durable
paper, the 24" wide Kraft or butcher paper works well.
If your airplane plans are large, but less than 36" wide,
consider having roll sized Xerox copies made at a blue
print company. The wire routings can be made directly
on actual views already provided by the designer. The
wiring diagram needs to be fairly large because a lot of
detail is squeezed into the area around the wire bun-
dles.
Planning the wire bundle routes is something like
planning major streets though neighborhoods.
 The
object is to decide where the bundles will allow short
fan-outs of the leads to individual components and
instruments. The wire route decisions are also driven
by support and access considerations. That is to say,
you don't want long lengths of wire, bundled or not,
hanging free in space. Further, wire routes must follow
paths that are accessible to you after the airplane has
been assembled. Some designers build wire routing
considerations (like conduits and extra holes) into their
airframes. When areas are likely to become inaccessi-
ble after assembly, they will have you route wires or
perhaps install conduits during the airframe fabrication
process.
ALL ROADS MAY LEAD TO ROME BUT ALL
WIRES LEAD TO THE BREAKER PANEL
I would start wire routing plans at the circuit breaker
or fuse panel. Every electrical device in the airplane
has wiring that connects to the bus. Major routes to the
engine compartment and any remotely mounted avion-
ics components must be decided. In many designs, the
battery is installed on opposite ends of the airplane for
weight and/or volume considerations.
 If a conduit
system such as I have described in the previous section
on grounding has been used, the major wire routes are
already established.
Once the major wiring highways are mapped in your
airplane, how does one get started? The heavy iron
bird builders make their harnesses on harness boards
that are evolved and fine tuned over the first few
production runs of an airplane. Since you are probably
in a "production run" of one only, your wire bundles
will have to be developed in place on the finished
8-11
The Aero-Electric Connection
 Wire Selection and Installation
NA\1CAllON
 UGHTS
- - - - - -
LANDING UGHT
TAXI UGHT
DOUE UGHT
II
Figure 8-5. Schematic Diagram, Lighting System
Page 8-12
The Aero-Electric Connection
Wire Selection and Installation
LT
WING.
,P-
 ~,
..L
 -
 -
I
CABIN
5
111-.-oJ
FUSELAGE
'6
 TAIL
CONE
~
- .J..
 17
 -
INSlRUMENT
PANEL
CABIN
- - - -
TT
6¢
Figure 8-6. Wiring Diagram, Lighting System.
Page 8-13
· The Aero-Electric Connection
product. The first strand of wire laid into place is not
likely to stay by itself! Nor the second, or third ....
Until a number of strands are tied together, the 'hig-
hways' may be more like wandering streams, very
poorly defmed. There are a few simple tools that make
it easy: string or cable lace, tye-wraps, and masking
tape. String specifically designed for lacing cables is
made by a number of firms. The stuff is usually made
of Dacron and is waxed. It is often supplied in a thin,
flat form. For temporary tying while building a wire
bundle, ordinary cotton string will suffice. If you plan
to use string as the major bundle tie material, the
synthetic cable lace is called for.
There is another wire tying product in the form of a
flat plastic strap with a sort of ratcheting buckle on one
end. These devices are single-shot in that once they
are installed up tight, they cannot be loosened. Tye-
Wrap is a trade name for one of the major manufac-
turers of these things but many people in the Wichita
aircraft industry refer to all brands of plastic ties as
Tye- Wraps. These may be found in several of the
catalogs listed in Appendix A. Masking tape is another
temporary fastening device that will be useful in rout-
ing wires.
CONSIDER
 THE PREASSEMBLED
 WIRE
PRODUCTS
I mentioned pre-bundled cables earlier. These materi-
als are widely used in the communications and control
industries. It is not unusual to find large spools of
multi-conductor cable in surplus houses. Most multi-
conductor cables you will find in surplus come from
situations where 22 or 20 gauge wires are used in
quantity. First, if you find a bundle of 20's, a 20 gauge
wire can be substituted for a 22; there is no prohibition
for making a wire larger than necessary except for
weight considerations, which in this case are minuscule.
The 20 gauge wire which replaces a 22 gauge wire may
also be protected with a 5 Amp breaker. As a hypothet-
ical case, let us assume that you need the combination
of wires I mentioned earlier to run from the switch
panel to the engine compartment of an Eze: two 14
gauge wires, three 16's and eight 22's. Looking into the
wire table, we find that a 16 gauge wire is four times
the CMA of a 22 gauge wire and a 14 gauge is seven
times the CMA of a 22 gauge. Two 14's will require
fourteen strands of 22, two 16'5 will require eight more
and the eight 22's bring the total to 30. In my trusty
wire catalog I fmd that cables having fifteen pairs of 22
wires can be had in an outside diameter of just over 0.5
inch! The wires in the prefab cable are color coded to
PageWire Selection and Installation
facilitate assembling the multiple 22 gauge wires into
equivalents of their larger cousins. Paralleling of
strands into larger combinations assumes two things:
first, the wires must be very close to the same length
(no particular problem when they come prebundled)
and second, the joints at the ends are of very good
electrical quality (to be covered in detail in the next
section).
If you are using conduits, pull wires into these first with
plenty of overhang at each end for later connection.
Don't make conduit routed wires into tied bundles, just
pull (or push) them through all at one time. It is much
easier to do this than to try put the last wire though a
conduit that already has 15 or 20 wires already in
place! This same admonition applies to situations
where conduits are not used but the routing is long and
difficult, like down the fuselage of a Long-Eze. In this
case, bundle up the portion of the wires that runs
through the airplane's netherworld and pull it in one
whack. Then beginning with the breaker and switch
panel, route wires from this most densely populated
area out to the equipment to be powered.
While the bundles are first taking form, combinations
of string, tape and tye-wraps may be used to hold them
near their final configuration. I often put tye-wraps
pulled up tight on a wire bundle to hold it in shape and
cut them off later as more wires and new tye-wraps are
added.
KEEP 'EM DANCING TOGETHER
Once your bundles are complete they should be
mounted to the airframe often enough to prevent them
from flopping around. There are various techniques
for accomplishing this. A classic wire retainer is the
"Adel" clamp, named in honor of the company that
used to make most of the wire and tube clamps used
here in Wichita. They are supplied to the military
under specification MS21919. These are metal strap
clamps lined with rubber or plastic. An example is
shown in Figure 8-7. These clamps are available in
1/16th inch increments from 3/16 up to sizes larger
than you'll ever need for wires. The size is depicted in
their part number by the last digits. A MS21919DG6 is
for gripping wire bundles 6/16" or 3/8" in diameter; an
MS21919DG12 is for 3/4" jobs. These clamps are
designed to be used directly on a wire bundle or piece
of tubing without need for additional protection of the
bundle or tube from the clamp's metal structure.
Check the catalogs and the Fly Market in Oshkosh for
these critters. You've got to learn to love these things!
8-14
The Aero-Electric Connection
SOFT RUBBER OR PlASTIC
FORWED UETAL C1.AUP
BUNDLE OF WIRES
lWO CLMAPS ARE OFTEN E:ASlER TO
SIZE 1HAN A. SINGLE ClAMP •
. FURTHER. ONE ClAWP COULD SUPPORT
WIRES AND A. SECOND ONE USED TO
SUPPORT A. LIQUID UN£.
THE US21919 CLAMP IS
A REAl. nNJ<ER-TOY
 IN
rrs ASSEMBLY VERSAllU1Y.
Wire Selection and Installation
AIRFRAME OR ENGINE
,MOUNTING
 lUBE
A. SINGLE CLAWP AROUND
A. STRUCTURAL TUBE MAY
BE USED TO SUPPORT 1WO
OR WORE WIRE BUNDLE/
TUBING SUPPORT ClAMPS.
Figure 8-7. Applications of the MS21919 Padded Clamps.
If the clamp is properly sized to the job, it takes three
hands to hold one closed with a pair of duckbill pli-
ers, insert the screw from one side and put the nut on
the other. I don't know how many screws I have
launched into oblivion when the duckbills slipped!
However, they are an excellent product and worth
learning how to use.
There are also wire bundle clamps made of plastic
which are acceptable everywhere except the engine
compartment. A a general rule, I wouldn't use plastic
clamps in any area of the airplane that is not period-
icly looked at and touched. Wire routings with ina-
cessable or seldom inspected locations should use the
padded metal clamps.
A major tenet of wire bundle immobilization states,
"Never support a bundle of wires in a manner that
presses the primary insulation of the wires against
the structure or a metallic clamping device". In a
welded tube airplane or in the engine compartment,
it is perfectly acceptable to string tie or tye-wrap a
bundle along a structural tube. At each tie point, a
Pagebuffer between the clamping device and primary
insulation of the wires must be provided.
Consider using heat shrinkable tubing available from
many of the sources listed in appendix A. Slip a short
piece of heat shrink over the wire bundle for each
tye-wrap location and shrink it down in the proper
location as you install the tye-wrap or clamp. You
might even want to use two pieces of heat shrink per
location. Pick a larger size for the second piece if
necessary; two layers of tubing will provide enhanced
abbrasion resistance.
If you are using a prefabricated cable material dis-
cussed previously, the extra protection is already in
place and these bundles may be tied directly to struc-
tural tubes. Caution with those strings and tye-wraps:
just snug 'em up, don't strangle the bundle.
In a fiberglass airplane laid up over foam, I have suc-
cessfully used rivnuts installed though the plys as
though they were sheet metal. The resulting threaded
hole then provides mounting support for wire bun-
8-15
The Aero- Electric Connection
cUes. Speaking of rivnuts, the term "rivnut" is the
trademark of the manufacturer that pioneered the
technology, the name escapes me at the moment.
Since the orgininal products were brought onto the
market, many similar products have appeared. Most
are quite good but beware of cheap imitations. I
have personally tested some of the offerings at the
Fly Market and found them lacking. In general, don't
use any rivnut that is made of aluminum unless you
have a reputable manufacturer's application data for
the product and you adhere to it. The best rivnuts
are made of mild steel.
Common practice dictates that you do not tie wires
up with any liquid lines such as brake fluid, primer
lines, oil pressure or fuel pressure gauge lines. The
prohibition against this is simple: a wire burning in
two from some electrical fault could cause a leak of a
flammable liquid and ruin your day completely. The
likelihood of this scenario is extremely remote. Your
wires are will be protected against burning by proper
use of breakers and fuses. Most installations I have
seen by homehuilders have liquid lines in more
danger of leaks from abrasions due to poor support
than from electrical faults! Were it my personal
airplane, I would have no problems with tying the
liquid lines into the wire bundles that run down the
sides of airplanes like Long-Eze's if it will ensure the
mechanical security for both the wires and tubes. Of
course, if you are using a conduit ground system, you
don't want to run the liquid lines down the limited
conduit space. In this instance the conduit may
become a structural support for liquid lines. As
always, use clamps, tye-wraps and or string to hold
liquid lines to the outside of the conduit. Use the
same care with liquid lines as with wires; use a buffer
wrap or padding to prevent the liquid line from
chafmg on the conduit at the support points.
As an aside on this topic, the only liquid line that
runs up the side of a Long-Eze containing a really
dangerous fluid is the tubing used to plumb up the
engine primer. Consider an electrically operated
primer like the Beech Skipper (and possibly
others).
Wire Selection and Installation
This system uses a small electrically operated valve in
the engine compartment to connect the pressure side
of the electric boost pump into the primer system
though a small orifice. Therefore, primer lines are
not brought into the cabin. The engine is primed by a
few seconds operation of the valve while the boost
pump is running. I like that concept whole lotI
A CONNECTOR ADDS THREE NEW "JOINTS"
TO EVERY WIRE
There are a number of popular designs for circuit
breaker panels and switch panels that can be preas-
sembled on the bench. Many use stub pendant cables
terminated in plastic connectors with crimp-on pins
to facilitate later installation in the airplane. Person-
ally, this is a mixed bag. Every connector introduces
three joints in each wire passing through the connec-
tor. One for each crimp to a pin and a third where
the two pins mate with each other. If properly ap-
plied, connectors can be a great help; the automotive
world has been using wire bundle connectors for
many years to facilitate prefabrication for later instal-
lation on an assembly line. However, if the connector
installation technique is marginal, then many possible
points of failure have been introduced. In the next
few sections we will discuss wire termination tech-
niques and the design of circuit protection systems.
LAST MINUTE HOT FLASH BEFORE GOING
TO PRESS ..
Many of you have indicated to me by phone and mail
that the Mil-W-22759 wire can be found in avionics
shops but only in sizes used in avionics installations.
The larger airframe sizes, particularly the large ones
used for starter and battery cable are more difficult
to find. Consider using electric welding cable avail-
able from most welding shops. It is only slightly
heavier than the aircraft grade wire but it is quite
flexible and easy to work with. Furthermore, its
outer jacket is specifically designed for nasty envi-
ronments!