Wire TerminationI have been putting off writing this section until last;
having difficulty coming up with the best words to
describe some things that really need to be shown in
pictures and/or demonstrations. We spent some of
your subscription money last week on an accessory for
our cameras; a bellows attachment that let us do some
really close up photography on some small subjects.
We're planning a series of slides for the seminars at
Oshkosh '89 to show HOW TO and HOW NOT TO
terminate wires. The needed details are beyond our
present illustration capability and we're not set up yet
to include photographs in this publication. So, until the
photographic update of this section is in print, we'll
take a whack at it with our best command of the King's
English. . . . .
The act of reliably connecting a wire to another wire or
to an electrical component is probably the easiest task
to accomplish in your wiring installation. But until you
understand what you are trying to accomplish and
master a few techniques for doing it, it's easy to make
joints that come apart; usually at inopportune times!
There are three requirements for making the lasting
connection: first, the connection must be electrically
sound. Second, the joint must be mechanically secure.
Third, unless the metallic conductor exposed in the
process of making the joint is located in a very benign
environment it must be protected from the environ-
ment.
All of you have probably seen the crimp on terminals
that are sold in virtually every hardware and automo-
tive store. A plastic case containing an assortment of
terminals along with a crimping tool can be had for a
few dollars. And, if you understand how they can be
properly applied, even these el-cheapo tools and their
terminals may have application in your electrical
system installation. You may also find yourself faced
with terminating a bundle of wires into a connector of
one or more pins that mates in turn with one of your
system's components. Strobe light power supplies
come to mind as an example. Certainly, your avionics
black boxes will have multi-pin connectors on the rear
which you will have to deal with. Many times these
units will come with some verbal or illustrated instruc-
tions for the application of connectors, but more often
they do not. They were originally marketed to the
aircraft manufacturers and fixed base dealers who,
after they had fotched up their first few installations,
presumably learned how not to fotch up the rest of
PageWire Termination and Connectors
and Connectors
them. Since many of you are only going to want one
shot at this, let us see if we can do it right the first
time!
The one thing you never do is wrap the end of a
stripped wire around a threaded shank and mash it
down under a nut or head of a screw! This may meet
the intent of rule #1 for awhile but it misses #2 badly.
I had a boss who told me once that ten "attaboys" in a
row would get me a raise but that one "awshit" would
wipe out all of the "attaboys" you had saved up and you
had to start over. So in keeping with the spirit of col-
lecting only attaboys, let's make connections that don't
break off under stress and vibration a month after the
airplane is all buttoned up.
RING TERMINALS FOR SINGLE STRANDS -
SOLDERED
The only way to go to any threaded post with a wire is
with a ring terminal soldered or crimped on the end.
Solder? Did I say solder? I remember my first lesson in
soldering. I was spending the summer fresh out of the
third grade with an uncle who possessed an electrical
engineering degree and was an employee of the local
power company. He empathized with my interest in
electronics although it was a long way from his particu-
lar field of expertise. I remember looking at a con-
struction article, I think it was a one-tube radio in one
of the Boy Scout publications; a merit badge project. i
had been scrounging parts (albeit some incorrect or
defective) and I was short the tools and skills to solder
the stuff together. Uncle Bill got out his trusty 250
watt electric iron (about the size of a policeman's billy
club) and a roll of solder. The solder was about the
size of 10 gauge wire. He showed me a text book he
had on the subject; the pictures gave step by step in-
structions for splicing and insulating house wiring and
wires on power poles! We spread out on the basement
floor and proceeded to stick the things together. It
didn't work when I finished it but it didn't matter.
Uncle Bill seemed satisfied enough with my perform-
ance that he allowed me to use the tools solo. Thus
began my experience with a new technique. It was
many years later before I truly understood the stuff and
became really proficient with it. I now possess at least
six different kinds of soldering tools and three or four
different kinds of solder. Let me share some of what I
have learned with you here and perhaps we can cut
several years off of your learning curve.
9-1
The Aero-Electric Connection
 Wire Termination and Connectors
Soldering, unlike welding, is a means for making a
metallic joint between two metals made up of possibly
different alloys using still a third alloy, the solder itself.
Solder obviously melts and flows at temperatures much
below the melting point of the metals being joined.
Welding involves heating the two parts to be joined up
to their melting points and then filling the gap with a
filler rod of the same material. Solders are available in
a variety of alloys for specialized tasks but the solder
we are going to need is made from tin and lead. If you
visit a well stocked solder supplier, you can find solder
in bars, sheets, wire ranging from cat whisker thin to
perhaps 1/2" in diameter and powdered. The ratio of
tin to lead may vary from 5 percent tin/95 percent lead
to perhaps 70 percent tin/30 percent dead. You may
even find special solders with a little silver, bismuth or
antimony in it. That just covers the metal aspect of
solder, then we get into fluxes. Flux is used to break
down the oxides (rust or corrosion) of the metals to be
joined to make clean bare metal available to the
molten solder. Fluxes also are used to coat the surface
of the molten solder and keep it from oxidizing too.
All metals react more readily with the air as their
temperatures are increased in the soldering proce-
dures. There are dozens of fluxes for soldering of
various materials in as many different applications.
Now, just what is it that the solder does? It is not a glue
or adhesive. Nor does it make connection by simply
surrounding and gripping the materials to be joined.
Solder achieves connection by actually dissolving a
smdl quantity of the base material into itself. Think of
solder as a solvent for solid copper. If you were to
make a micro cross-section of two wires twisted to-
gether and then soldered you will get a situation which
is depicted in Figure 9-1. Note that in the interface
between the tin/lead solder and the copper wire, tjiere
is a region where a small amount of the copper has
actually become dissolved into and alloyed with the
tin/lead solder. This layer isn't very thick because as
the copper migrates into the solder, it alters its alloy
and raises the alloy's melting temperature. So, the
hotter the iron you solder with, the deeper the copper
penetrates into the solder but at most the interface is
only a few molecules thick!
Let's look at the topic of melting point for a moment.
Figure 9-2 shows the nature of solder's melting point as
its alloy is varied. The figure also depicts another
characteristic of the various alloys of solder. Notice
that an alloy of 63% tin has the lowest melting point of
all the tin/lead solders. Note also that with all solders
Pageother than 63/37 there is an intermediate plastic phase
between the liquid and solid phases. This 63/37 ratio
is known as a eutectic alloy; it has little or no plastic
range in the transition from liquid to solid upon cool-
ing. Ever heard the term "cold solder joint"? What is
being described is a joint wherein the solder has a dull
gray crystalline appearance; is weak and almost literally
crumbles when stressed. The way that the joint got
that way was because of two factors: First, a non-eutec-
tic alloy of solder was used. Second, the joint was
moved while the solder was in the plastic range as the
joint was cooling. Solution to the problem? Use the
right kind of solder. For most of your applications, an
electronic grade solder of 63/37 alloy, 0.062" in diame-
ter and having an active, non-corrosive flux is recom-
mended. Spend the few extra bucks and get a good
name brand, my own personal favorite is 63/37 Kester
Resin "44" in an 0.032" diameter. It might seem expen-
sive at about $8 per pound but a pound will last you a
long, long time and the quality is unquestionable. I've
used the Ersin Multi-core electronic solders with pleas-
ing results too. However, whichever solder you choose
63/37 is the MAGIC number to insist on.
The melting point figure also illustrates the phenome-
non I mentioned earlier about the alloy shift raising the
melting point as the copper molecules begin to dissolve
into the molten solder. Note that as the alloy shifts
away from eutectic, not only does its plastic range grow
wider, its melting point increases as well. A little bit of
copper causes the melting point in the solder/copper
interface to take quite a jump thus preventing the wire
from dissolving completely into the molten solder.
Neat, huh? What are all the other kinds of solder for?
Well, in my younger days it was a big deal to remove
all the chrome from your car and fill in the molded
channels with a material called body solder. In this
case, the body man needed a very wide plastic range so
he could sculpture with it. A 30/60 alloy was more to
his liking. Eutectic solder would have been totally
useless for this application! Here is an opportunity for
a high tech practical joke, slip a bar of 63/37 into a
body man's tool box. He'll go nuts trying to mold the
stuff into any kind of shape! Just about the time it
starts to soften it'll fall on the floor.
Now, as you make perfect joint after perfect joint with
the right kind of solder, you can imagine all those little
molecules of copper swimming out into a rapidly thick-
ening quagmire of molten metal. You'll also know that
the probability of a "cold" joint is almost zero as the
joint cools.
9-2
A THIN LAYER OF SOLDER ALLOYED
1M1H A TRAO OF COPPER. MICKNESS
EXAGERATED HERE FOR CLARITY.
LAYER OF PURE SOLDER
\
 q
;:f;;'{/>
Figure 9-1. Anatomy of a Soldered Wire Joint.
PURE
COPPER
WRE
: , "]j)}jj"!t""""^
! "'
 "%q ":i4?z,zr"""
i J:" " ""r"t:"", \ \\j
DECREAS1NG TIN m
 6 37 O _
 b ll|mEA8NG 11n
Figure 9-2. Solder Charactersitics Versus Temperature and Alloy.
Page 9-3
The Aero-Electric Connection
 Wire Termination and Connectors
Once the alloying process is understood, the need for
dean metal and a good flux is more apparent. Oxides
of the metal do not alloy with the solder and indeed
prevent alloying by the good metal underneath. The
flux helps carry away small amounts of oxides that have
formed since the metal was last deaned. If you follow
the rule in the previous section about using only tinned
wire, deaning will not be a serious issue for you. Tin is
a very stable material compared to copper and a fresh-
ly stripped, tin plated wire is ready to solder with no
further concerns about deaning.
The reason for all this discussion about solder is
because when properly applied, soldering is a very
versatile, low-cost method for terminating wires.
Figure 9-3 shows a solder lug available from electronic
supply houses that has a shape of particular interest to
homebuilders. The unsymmetrical, dog-bone shape
lends itself very nicely to being soldered to the end of a
wire and then having the joint protected by a length of
heat shrink tubing (see the Digi-Key Catalog). The
shape allows the shrunk tubing to get a good grip on
the assembly and provides coverage for some distance
either side of the solder joint. If you would rather not
invest in crimp on terminals and associated tools, this
method of terminating wires in ring type terminals is
most acceptable, perhaps even preferable, for use in
airplanes!
RING TERMINALS FOR SINGLE STRANDS -
CRIMPED
The tradeoffs between soldering and crimping are not
terribly compelling to the homebuilder. Crimped
terminals are the product of choice for factories.
There is no heat involved so careless applications of
soldering irons to paint, plastiq carpets and upholstery
is not a problem. Crimped terminals are also a bit
more compact and look better than their soldered and
heat shrink covered cousins. But, they are more
expensive, they perform no better and they require
proficiency in another kind of skill.
Hand tools for applying crimped terminals range from
$10 to $200. The differences in them lie in the quality
of the end result. Expensive crimp tools have precision
dies which are brought closed against hard stops thus
insuring the proper upset of the metals in the
terminal/wire interface. These tools also feature
ratchets in their mechanisms that insure that the tool is
operated through a full crimp cycle thus preventing
inadvertent under-crimping. I own several such tools.
I also own some of the $10 variety and over the years, I
have acquired the skill and knowledge needed to
produce adequate crimps with these tools as well. It
takes a bit of practice and some knowledge as to
proper application which we'll get into now.
If you are going to use crimped terminals, consider the
AMP Preinsulated, Diamond Grip (PIDG) products in
the Digi-Key catalog. There are also some lower cost
ring terminals in the catalog by the 3M company.
These are roughly equal to AMP's Plasti-grip line of
insulated terminals. I don't recommend these but I
would prohibit them only in the engine compartment.
Here's why: when crimping any preinsulated terminal
on a wire there are TWO crimps to consider. The first
is about-one third of the length of the insulator back
from the ring end of the terminal. This crimp forms
the metallic barrel of terminal down onto the exposed
wire, the second crimp is about two thirds of the way
along the insulator from the ring and it forms the
insulation of the terminal around the insulation of the
wire. Mind you that the second crimp does not have to
get a death-hold grip on the wire like the first crimp
does. All you are needing to do 'with the second crimp
is immobilize the wire behind the first crimp so that
vibration doesn't put additional stresses on a wire that
you have just stressed by mashing it!
If you look in the wire end of a new PIDG terminal,
you will find a thin copper liner inside the plastic insu-
lation grip. The plastic portion of a preinsulated termi-
nal forms rather nicely around a wire at room tempera-
ture but at elevated temperatures found in an engine
compartment, the plastic tends to return to its original
BC (before crimping), round shape! The support for
tjie wire is thus degraded or lost completely. The
PIDG terminal has a metal sleeve in its insulation grip
that prevents the terminal's wire grip from digressing
due to temperature extremes. The terminals sold in
automotive stores are almost assuredly of the pure
plastic form of insulation grip. I won't tell you not to
use them but I don't like 'em for airplanes.
Now about these low cost tools. The dies shown on the
tool in Figure 9-4 are of the type that are used on the
preinsulated terminals. These jaws are shown on the
opposite side of tool's pivot from the handles but I
have seen tools where these dies are on the inside of
the handles; it doesn't matter. Do not use any crimp
tool that penetrates the side of the terminal. There are
a number of low cost tools for crimping uninsulated
terminals that punch a sort of indentation on the side
Page 9-4
The Aero-Electric Connection
g
a
Q
 :
Wire Termination and Connectors
1HE "D=ONE" 1EmNAL NIH BUILT IN
AVAILABLE TFIROUW aEcTRoNIcs WPPLY Haj=
D)
double wall heat sirink has a yarABLE
WHlW IS SQUEEZED m TFE 1MRE, JOINT
AND TERMINAL DUHNG TFE APPL1CKTION pms&
\d
VIARE SOLDERED TO 1ERldlNAL
Figure 9-3. The "Dogbone' Terminal for Soldered Wire Terminations.
INSULATUN ~ DIE (0P¶ONAL, MOST TOOL MFO'S
INTEND THAT THE INSJLATON BE EliFED M1H
I—me same 0(e as 1he wire).
O)
t
}
\_
10-12 A1NG WE (YELLOW PSDG) (op¶0Nd
BECAUX OF LARGER FORCES REQURED
to auw yellow 1erminaia few low cost
/DOLS NLL INCLUDE MS SZE).
16-18 AWG DE (BLUE PIDG)
22-18 AWG DIE (RED P¶DG)
Figure 9-4, Tooling for Preinsulated Ring Terminals.
Page 9-5
The Aero-Electric Connection
of the wire grip of an uninsulated terminal. Neither
these tools nor the uninsulated terminals should be
used on an airplane.
First, study the terminal you are about to crimp on the
wire. It is the right size for the wire? A red insulator
on a PIDG terminal indicates an 18 to 22 AWG wire
range, a blue insulator is for the 12 to 16 AWG wires
and a yellow is for 8 to 10 AWG wires. Are there dies
on the jaws of your tool marked to suggest which die is
appropriate for the terminal? Insert the wire into the
terminal; the insulation should bottom out against the
back of the wire grip portion of the terminal and inside
the insulator such that the bare strands just barely
emerge from the ring side of the wire grip. Study the
situation for each type of terminal you use and learn
the proper strip length for each.
Now, with the wire firmly bottomed out in the insula-
tor, grip the terminal in the crimping tool with the tool
centered over the wire grip and with the jaws parallel
to the plane of the ring. Put a squeeze on it. Relax the
squeeze a little and try to pull the wire out. Put a 5-
pound or so pull on it. If the wire pulls loose, you
didn't squeeze hard enough. If the wire stays in, take
the terminal out of the tool and look at your crimp.
Did the plastic extrude out from under the tool so that
any metal is exposed? Did the plastic crack down the
sides? Does the thing just look squashed? If so, you
squeezed too hard! Cut the terminal off and try again.
The object is to "calibrate" your squeeze to the task; its
not diRicult but it does take some practice and a little
critical observation of your results. There is a wide
range between too little and too much for our pur-
poses.
Once the wire grip crimp is mastered you are 95% of
the way there. Next, using the next smaller die opening
or perhaps a special die designated on your tool for the
purpose, put another crimp on the terminal's insulator
to close it snugly down around the insulation of the
wire. Now look at the finished terminal installation.
Are the two crimps nicely spaced on the insulator and
are they both parallel to the plane of the ring? This
isn't a critical issue but it is one of craftsmanship. In
airplanes that would otherwise have taken show hon-
ors, I have seen the good PIDG terminals applied with
a pair of Vise-Grips. Were I on the judging committee
I have the errant builder go wash and wax the winner's
airplane and then we'd talk about the rework needed to
make his own airplane's electrical system reliable as
well as neat.
Wire Termination and Connectors
TERMINALS FOR THE BIG GUYS
The red, blue and yellow PIDG terminals will take care
of most of your wire-to-stud terminations but how
about those big honkers that run from the battery to
the starter contactor? There are PIDG terminals for
these wires too but eyen the production hand tools for
these wires is a hydraulic actuated ram! Consider
getting these terminals installed for you by a local FBO
or perhaps an electrical contractor. I've seen these
tools and terminals for big wires used by many wire
installers in the various buildings I have been employed
in. Just cut your wire to exact length required; allow for
the addition to length when the terminal is added. I
suspect that a local contractor could provide and apply
PIDG terminals (or their equivalent) for a few dollars
per end. There is a home brew alternative to the PIDG
'
 terminations. ·
You can make custom terminals for big wires by select-
ing a drill just larger than the bundle of stripped wire
strands. Cut a 1" piece of 1/2 or perhaps 3/4-inch soft
copper tubing and mash it flat in a vise with the shank
of the drill inside. You'll find it not difficult to pull the
tubing down tight over the drill stem mandrel thus
forming a flat shape with a tubular passage down one
side. Drill an appropriately sized hole in the flat to go
over your contactor terminal. Use a spotfacer and/or
get a good grip on the thing with a vise or Visegrips
when drilling. The copper is soft and likes to snag on
the drill. A spotfacer makes a nice hole with much less
tendency to snag.
Strip the cable back 1" and put the flag terminal on it.
Use a large iron (200 watts or more) or a low flame on
a propane torch to solder the terminal to the wire.
"What I!!!", you say, "What about insulation support?"
In these bigger wires, adequate vibration protection
can be achieved by supporting the wire against struc-
ture close to the terminal. A PIDG terminal would be
nice and do it all in one whack but a homemade flag
terminal is just fine too and very inexpensive.
Years ago my first mobile ham radio installation was in
a 6-volt, 1941 Pontiac coupe. My transmitter was in
the trunk of the car and used a 600 volt dynamotor to
produce the necessary high voltage for the output stage
vacuum tubes. The dynamotor draw was just over 40
amps (with a 25 amp generator, I didn't get into long-
winded transmissions, especially at night!). I remem-
ber using soft copper tubing to fabricate flag terminals
that were soldered to the cable that ran back to the
Page 9-6
The Aero-Eiectric Connection
 Wire Termination and Connectors
f¶ece of meet copper or soft copper
TUBING. USE K± OR
 fN A
PRESS TO FORM OVER MANDm. THAT WILL
just admit me wre strands —\ub
"""""isattery souiNaD
TERMINAL POST
LOCK WASHER
IE "
1jj"wrr wre
T"®"""""""""""""
.040
 SOLDER
 FEED
 HOLES
two or
 more on both
SK OF WIRE BARRLL
"
STRANDS
ID HOMEMADE FLAG
terminal
Figure 9-5. Home Made 'Flag" Terminals for Big Wires.
noie h mmi. jaw dww v|kno ams 1h£ ¶ps of 1he
mE WP BAac INTO ME &7ER OF 1FE S1RANDNG
j1
'\L MARE ep IXE (EAW
NLLt
USUALL:¢OVIDE
AT LEAST TWO SZES). BE SURE TO UX THE ONE
APPROPROPKIATE m 1H£ TERMINAL BBNG INSTALLED.
THE NS1JLA¶ON GRIP DIE MAY BE IDENTICAL
IN MAPE AND SUW7LY UFFERENT IN SZE FRW
THE 1MRE GRIP DIE R ST COULD HAVE A SPEQAL *APE
CHEQC 1HE MANUFACTURERS |NsTURcnoNs ON ME
PROPER USE OF THE TOOL
Figure 9-6. Tooling for Sheet Formed Pin and Socket Connectors.
Page 9-7
The Aero-Electric Connection
.
trunk. When your system only runs 6.9 volts to begin
with, a few hundred millivolts drop was a significant
percentage of total system voltage. Let's see. . . 4
AWG wire is 6 AWG steps from 10 AWG that means
1/4th milliohm per foot. R-feet from battery to trunk
yields 3 milliohms of wire. 40 amps times 3 milliohms
was 120 millivolts drop in that wire. In 1960, I hadn't
the foggiest notion of how that analysis would come
out. Furthermore, I didn't have any instruments accu-
rate enough to see how bad the drop was. It is interest-
ing to note 28 years later that the 4 AWG wire (the
biggest I could find at the Boeing surplus yards) had
been a pretty good choice!
MULTI-WIRE CONNECTORS
It is almost a sure bet that you will have to deal with
some multi-wire connectors at some point in the
completion of your airplane. Many of the avionics
products will have connectors which pass multiple
wires from the airframe systems into the interior of the
black boxes. The Whelan Strobes use AMP Mate-N-
Locks. You might also find it expedient to use a multi-
wire connector at say, the wing root for convenient
opening of a wire bundle when removing a wing.
Cessna starting using the AMP Mate-N-LocK series
plastic connectors while I was in their employ in the
late 60's. Many eyebrows were raised, mine included
when we saw these sheet metal, crimp on pins support-
ed in plastic housings. Up to that time, wires bundles
needing occasional breaking were fabricated with mil
standard metal shelled connectors with soldered pins
or a perhaps a sleeved knife splice (See the Digi-Key
catalog PIDG listings) was put into every strand in the
bundle. More oRen than not, the wires that ran out to
removable portions of the airframe, like a wing, were
run in unbroken strands. The poor guy in the field had
to 'deal with cutting and splicing the wires if he re-
moved a wing.
Wire Termination and Connectors
Cessna, like the automotive industry, was finding it
more efficient to install wire bundles in the assembly
stations for the various pieces of structure and some
economical but reliable form of connector was needed.
The Mate-N-Locks filled the bill nicely. Digi-Key
stocks these connectors along with the Molex brand
multi-wire devices. They also have low cost tools for
terminal application. The dies for these tools are illus-
trated in Figure 9-6. These are very different from the
dies for a PIDG installation. Note that the pins for
both the Mate-N-LocKs and the Molex connectors are
formed from hard copper sheet. The pins have both
insulation and wire grips. The funny looking dies are
shaped so that during the crimp, the sheet metal tabs
on the wire grip are rolled back into the center of the
wire strands. The same form is applied to the insula-
tion grip. Another nice feature of these types of plastic
connector is that the pins are installed by simply push-
ing them into the back side of the housing until they
"click" into place. Furthermore, they may be removed
for replacement of damaged pins by means of extrac-
tion tools which are also handy if you have "clicked" a
wire in to the wrong hole!
Until we can give photographic coverage to the proper
installation of the sheet metal pins in the Molex and
Mate-N-LocK type connectors, experiment with them a
bit. They are inexpensive enough that you can afford
to sacrifice a few housings and pins in your education.
Take some scraps of wire and put some pins on them.
Look at your results. Two grips; one for the wire and
one for the insulation. The pins are listed as different
part numbers for different sized wires. Make sure that
you observe the limits on these and don't try to use the
wrong size pin on a wire. It is possible to put two or
even three wires into a single pin on these connectors;
just pick a pin that has enough wire and insulation grip
capacity to get its 'arms' around all the strands and
their insulations.
Page 9-8