AeroElectric Connection                                                                                                                                         Grounding
                                                                             Page 5-4                                                                                  04/00to give each system all the structurally independent grounds
it needs without having to share.  I highly recommend itsuse.
There's an interesting fallout of this architecture. A few
years ago we  ran an airport for a short time.  One of ourmechanics was reinstalling an engine that had been removedfor overhaul. After hooking up everything he could find thatwas loose, he crawled into the left seat, primed the engineand hit the starter. The propeller didn't move and a cloud ofsmoke poured out from behind the panel!  Seems thateverything got replaced EXCEPT a ground strap fromcrankcase to firewall.  The starter tried to find a groundthrough shields on the p-leads along with throttle andmixture controls jackets which caused them to get very hot,very quickly!  Grounding the battery directly to crankcaseeliminates this possibility.
Minimizing high-current path resistances has another
benefit: many airplane designs don't need a lot of batterycapacity but some builders find that a larger battery (lowerinternal resistance) improves cranking performance.  Anumber of single-engine Pipers have 35 ampere-hourbatteries in the tail: they didn't need the extra capacity, butthe lower internal resistance improved cold weathercranking operations.  One of my consulting clients holdsSTCs for replacing the 35 ampere-hour batteries with a 25ampere-hour, recombinant gas battery. The new battery hasa 5 milliohm internal resistance and weighs 22.5 pounds.Cranking performance is greatly improved in spite of thenew battery's smaller and lighter package.
METAL AIRFRAME GROUNDING
Ground connections on a metal airplane  are relativelysimple but some cautions should be observed.  First, cleanall of the paint, primer and corrosion from around the holewhich is used to ground a connection.   A round wire brushwith a pilot in the center is called a "bonding brush."  It isdesigned to be used in a drill motor for this type of cleaning.Grounds for heavy current flows such as for the negativelead of the battery or the grounding strap between an engineand airframe should connect to the heaviest structureavailable; avoid making these connections to thin sheetmetal even if "heavier structure" is several feet away andyou would rather not have the extra weight of the wire!Antennas may require grounding not just around  mountingscrews but to the total area of metal under the antenna base.Read installation instructions carefully and if you are stillnot sure, then check with the manufacturer directly.COMPOSITE AIRFRAME POWER 
GROUND SYSTEM
In the composite airplane a builder must provide for a
"common" conductor or power distribution ground  which ismissing because the airframe structure and skin are made ofepoxy and non-conducting fibers. In a conventional tractordesign the task is somewhat simpler than with the canardpusher; the major power sources, controls and loads are moreconcentrated in the front of the airframe.  Many canardpusher designs mount the major source (alternator) alongwith the major power load (starter) at one end of the airframewith the battery as far away as possible on the other end withthe controls and loads being scattered along in between!
FIREWALL / INSTRUMENT 
PANEL GROUND
Earlier I wrote about the 24 and 48-point, Fast-On tab
ground bus offered by B&C and from our website catalog.These products offer a means for creation of a low noise,single point ground for all the equipment located  on aninstrument panel.  For tractor airplanes, two such groundbusses  may  be used back to back on the firewall to providehigh quality grounding for equi pment on both sides of the
cowl. The technique simply calls for bolting two groundbusses back to back  using a single brass bolt to providesolid electrical connection between the ground busses ANDa sturdy attach point for the crankcase to firewall bond strapor wire on the engine side. Battery minus lead needs to go tothe same bolt on either side of the firewall depending onwhere the battery is located.
A word of caution when bolting the two busses back to back
through a composite firewall.  Don't depend on anyintermediate composite material to maintain ground studtension.  In Figure 5-2  I've shown a brass bushing or stackof brass washers (Item 4) with a 5/16" i.d.,  a 3/4" o.d. and alength equal to the nominal thickness of the firewall.  First,a 5/16" hole is drilled all the way through the firewall.  Next,from the cockpit side, a 3/4" hole is spotfaced down to thesurface of the firewall sheetmetal.  Make temporaryinstallation of the small ground bus (8) on the firewall usingbolt (2), bushing or spacing washers  (4) and one  nut (6). Use ground bus (8) as a drill guide to make three #18 holesall the way through.  Remove ground bus and reinstall allhardware with large ground bus (3) inside, bushing (4) infirewall, small ground bus (8) under cowl.  Hold all this stuffin place with three screws (1) and nuts (5).   Small hardwareis for anti-rotation only; don't put a lot of torque on thesefasteners-- just snug 'em up. 