AeroElectric Connection                                                                                                                                         Grounding
                                                                             Page 5-2                                                                                  04/00Figure 5-1. The Many Faces of a GroundSystem
When it's important to make the distinction, labels within the
ground symbol triangle will be tied to specific groundinglocations within the airplane. For example, an enginecrankcase is one specific location, a  ground bus behind theinstrument panel will certainly  be another,  and the batterymay have a ground bus located adjacent to it.  Every   powerdistribution diagram, set of wiring diagrams or largeillustration will have a list of symbols key and describewhere they are located.  In our drawings used throughout thebook, we’re trying to standardize on ground symbols bylocation as follows: G1 is crankcase, G2 is firewall, G3 isinstrument panel, and LG is used to denote local ground tothe airframe in metal airplane.  If the triangle is empty,  itmeans (1) the diagram is a simplified discussion of wiringwhere a ground is needed but not defined until a specificinstallation is determined or (2) a ground is needed foroperation but its  location in the system is non-critical. Inwriting,  the term "ground" will usually refer to a powerdistribution ground except when we are discussing anantenna or installation of a particular piece of equipmentwith special grounding requirements.
Power distribution always requires a path out and back for
electrical energy but in some diagrams it is not always clearas to the need for the ground.  For example, a schematic orwiring diagram may show a single wire from switch to lampfixture. If the diagram describes a metal airplane, the"ground" path is implied: power return is made byphysically mounting the fi xture to surrounding metal
structure. If the draftsman takes the trouble to really finishthe diagram, a ground symbol will be included right on the
edge of the appliance’s symbol to confirm suspicions as tohow ground is to be supplied.  In the case of specialaccessories, all of the connections required for the device tofunction may  be carried on individual wires and the groundsymbol may only connect to the enclosure of the device forradio noise shielding.  Further, the amount of current whichflows in the "ground" connection may not be known to you,which might further complicate the choice of how to treat theconnection in a composite airplane.  We cannot anticipate allof the cases here in this section and provide detailedcoverage. You need to be aware of the possibilities.  
WHEN IS A GOOD GROUND NOT ?
Problems with poor conduction in high current paths
(especially grounds) are most difficult to diagnose.Investigations into poor voltage regulation or starterperformance always begin with conductors other thangrounds. However, it's important to remember that for everyelectron that leaves the battery another electron has to returnvia the other terminal; the same currents that flow in thepower distribution wiring also flow in ground return wiringor conductors.  
Let's do an analysis on a hypothetical composite airplane
where the battery is mounted  about 6 feet from the engine.Let's assume  the battery is a pretty good flooded (wet),lead-acid battery with an internal resistance of about 10