AeroElectric Connection                                                                                                                                         Grounding
                                                                             Page 5-7                                                                                  04/00Consider a Vari-Ez with alternator but  no starter,  an oil
pressure sensor  grounded to crankcase and an indicatorgrounded to nose mounted battery,  and 15 feet of 10AWGused to connect the crankcase to battery minus.  Yes,10AWG is too small for engine cranking but not too smallfor a 30 amp alternator.  10AWG wire has a resistance of1.0 milliohm per foot.  
If  the alternator is putting out 20 amps of current to power
systems and recharge the battery, the voltage drop in a #10ground wire between crankcase and battery will be on theorder of 0.2 volts.  This voltage appears to the oil pressureindicator as an ADDITIONAL oil pre ssure of 5 psi.
Turning the alternator on and off will produce a 5 psi wigglein the oil pressure gage when in fact, oil pressure is stable.
In the case of headset grounds consider this:  alternators are
three-phase ac devices  with full-wave, bridge-rectifiershaving an unfiltered  ripple equal to  5% of system voltage.On a 14 volt system, ripple voltage will be on the order of(14 x 0.05) equals 0.7 volts peak-to-peak.  This same rippleapplies to output current so if the alternator were loaded to20 amps, (20 x 0.05) equals 1.0 amps, peak-to-peak.    Let'sassume an RV4 as the hypothetical airplane with front andrear-seat headset and microphone jacks in both seatlocations.  The audio signal voltages associated with  bothmicrophone and headphones  are on the order of  tens ofmillivolts.  If  the 1 amp of ripple we just described isflowing through airframe resistances of as little as 5milliohms, an alternator  ripple noise of up to 5 millivoltscan appear between  two separate places on the airframe.Depending on where the headset brackets are riveted to
structure, the 5 millivolts of ground loop noise  may appearin series with a headset or microphone audio and produceaudible interference in the headsets or your transmittedsignal.
In metal airplanes,  headset and microphone jacks should be
mounted on insulating panels or insulated from metal panelsby  the use of fiber shoulder washers.   We supply extrudedfiber washers from our website catalog for the specificpurpose of insulating headset and microphone jacks fromlocal airframe ground. Microphones and headsets shouldtake their low-side audio  connections on shields or separatewires all the way back to where the interphone, audiodistribution amplifier and/or radios are grounded . . . usuallyright behind the panel.  This is one reason why I recommendthe B&C forest-of-Fast-On-tabs for grounding all instrumentpanel mounted equipment.  Single point grounds are, bydefinition, loop-free.
ANTENNA GROUNDING
This topic is covered in detail in Chapter 13.  Suffice it tosay for now that antenna grounds have nothing to do withgrounds for any other systems.  The manner in which anantenna seeks a "ground reference" is dependent on  theantenna design, frequency of operation and whether or  notthe airplane is metal skin or Fiberglass.  