                                                                             Page 5-1                                                                                  04/00Grounding
"Grounded" is an archaic electrical circuit term with a literal
meaning; the circuit is connected to a metallic rod driveninto the earth. The British expression  "earthed" has thesame meaning. The term became commonplace in theelectrical power distribution and the radio/electronic fieldsat about the same time in history.  I haven't researched theword Ben Franklin used to describe the connection of  hislightning rods to the earth; perhaps the term is older than Ithink!
In the early days of radio, receiving and transmitting antenna
systems required a good earth ground for best performance.A pipe driven into the ground was always connected to thechassis of the radio receiver or transmitter. At the same time,the people who designed receivers and transmitters used thechassis for a common connection of all the power suppliesand signals within the radio set. The meaning was  dilutedwhen the electronics people began to use an earth groundsymbol to denote connection to the chassis of an electronicassembly.
I have a couple of books on electronics published in the late
30's and early 40's, given to me by an uncle  when I wasabout 10 years old.  These books mark my introduction toelectronics.  I noted that radio antenna installations inautomobiles referred to the automobile chassis as "ground"and schematics for some radio receivers used the earthground symbol to refer to a common or chassis connectionwhether or not a true earth ground was needed for bestperformance.
Over the years the term "grounded" has acquired a variety
of meanings in as many technologies. In some cases, it canhave different meanings in the same technology. Someambiguities were resolved with additional terms for groundsuch as "common,  counterpoise,  ground-plane, return  andneutral." All have been used to impart a more precisemeaning in specific instances. I will try to be both conciseand properly descriptive when using the word "grounded."Figure 5-1 illustrates a  variety of symbols used to indicate
electrical connections to ground.  I know of no otherelectrical entity which shares so many different symbols.
Grounds fall into three broad categories in aircraft.  The first
and most familiar is a carry-over from other vehicle systemsand it refers to the metallic portion of the chassis and skin ofthe vehicle. The term is common to both the powerdistribution (first category) and antenna (second category)systems when working with a metal vehicle.  The thirdcategory is a special type of ground  which is unique to theinternal workings of a particular black box or piece ofequipment.33
The need for an independent section in this publication on
"grounds" is brought about largely by the evolution ofcomposite aircraft but we'll see that grounding in a metalairplane isn't necessarily "a piece of cake" either.  If theframe and skin of the vehicle are not conductors, then specialrequirements need to be placed on the various categories ofgrounds. Furthermore, they may or may not be related toeach other.  For example, in order to provide for a powerdistribution ground system, a combination of conductorsmust be installed to provide  common connection for all ofthe equipment which normally works with an airframeground in a metal airplane.  Antenna grounds may (and inmost cases should) be separate from a power distributionground system. Wiring diagrams which appear in laterchapters will make clear distinctions as to the nature andfabrication of any required ground.
In Figure 5-1, one of the ground symbols depicted is an open
triangle with the conductor to be grounded attached in thecenter of one side.  There are characters inside the trianglethat I will use to identify exactly which ground is to be usedfor a particular conductor. 