AeroElectric Connection                                                                                                                                         Grounding
                                                                             Page 5-3                                                                                  04/00Cranking Path Resistance - how BAD is it?
Battery resistance . . . . . . . . .10.0 milliohms
2 Contactors    . . . . . . . . . . .  4.0 milliohms15' of 2AWG wire  . . . . . . . .  2.3 milliohmsBolted Joints (4 wire segments with 2 jointsat 0.5 milliohms each) . . . . . .  8.0 milliohms                                           _____________Total resistance   . . . . . . . . . 24.3 milliohmsmilliohms.  Without welding it's difficult to make a joint
between any two conductors that's better than 1.0 milliohmsper joint.  Consider 2AWG wire with a resistance of  0.156milliohms per foot. Total length of "fat" wires in thecranking path will be about 15 feet.  Therefore  15 x 0.156= 2.34 milliohms resistance in the wire alone.   How aboutthe battery and starter contactors?  Hmmmmm . . . twocontacts each in series held closed by an energizedelectromagnet. Can't be better than 1 milliohm per contactso there's another 4 milliohms total.  Add 'em up . . .
24 thousandths of an ohm? ? ? ?  It is difficult to imagine
how so tiny a resistance can make a difference but considerthat for all but the smallest engines, a starter may easily
draw over 200 amps!  Ohm's Law says that for every ampereof current pushed through 1 ohm of resistance, there will be1 volt of drop across the resistor or volts = amps x ohms.24.3 milliohms times 200 amps equal 4860 millivolts or 4.86volts of drop. If we started with a 12.5 volt battery, we'llnow see about 12.5 minus 4.86 or 7.5 volts at the starterterminals. We've lost about 1/3 of our cranking energy in thetrip from battery to motor!  On a cold morning, the engineis stiffer and battery resistance goes up. Just when theengine would like to have more cranking energy, thebattery's ability to deliver it goes down.
Purists among you may take issue with some of the numbers
I've used. To be sure, a little care in selection and assemblyof parts can reduce the resistance numbers somewhat. Thepoint is that resistance of wire, contactors and battery arebuilt in: we have no control over them and they are neverzero.  Also note that bolted joints make up a significantpercentage of total drop.  Even minimizing wire length hasa rather small effect compared to reduction in number ofbolted joints. Some of the worst performing crankingcircuits are found on metal airplanes where the battery isbonded locally to airframe. Engine is bonded to mount byjumpers around the vibration isolators and the mount is
"grounded" to airframe through its mounting bolts.If I had my fondest wish for ultimate performance in an
aircraft electrical system, the battery, starter and alternatorwould all be within 1 foot of each other! Interestinglyenough, Van's RV series airplanes come closer to that goalthan most kitplanes.  RV batteries are on firewall centerlinewith starter and alternator just an engine length away.Further, many single-engine Cessnas have the battery on thefirewall just inches from starter and alternator on the rear ofthe engine.
In a grounding figure back in Appendix Z  I've illustrated the
most important wires in the airplane. The first wire I installis from battery minus to firewall ground stud. A braidedbonding jumper goes from this bolt to the  crankcase.  Forcanard-pushers with forward batteries, an instrument panelground bus is wired to battery minus in the nose.  Groundpoints for stuff in the rear are provided with a second groundbus mounted on the firewall and wired to the crankcase justlike a tractor airplane. This grounding architecture optimizesengine cranking performance and minimizes ground loopproblems which may degrade voltage regulation, causenoises in an audio system or radio and affect the accuracy  orstability of engine instruments.  This mechanically simplesystem is the antithesis of a system installed in a Long-Ezeby one of my readers:  because his airplane was plastic andglass, he wanted,  "plenty of places to attach wires to a goodground."  A wire came forward from his crankcase andbolted to one end of a brass strip over the spar.  The stripwas drilled and tapped for 8-32 screws which he thoughthandy for making local grounds.  Each end of the strip wasdrilled for a 5/16" bolt to which  a ground  wire wasattached. This ground strip was repeated at the panel andAGAIN near the battery.  From battery post to enginecrankcase he had fabricated a bus conductor with 8 solderedand 8 bolted joints!  To top it off,  he used 4AWG wire asthe ground conductor and steel hardware for bolting it alltogether. The cranking performance was abysmal!
While we're discussing ground system fabrication . . . if the
battery and engine are on opposite ends of a compositeairplane it's important to run battery (+) and (-) cables rightnext to each other as they traverse the cockpit and instrumentpanel areas. Tie-wrap them together every 6 inches or so.I've seen several kit manuals suggest that a couple of studson  a firewall are sufficient for termination of all systemgrounds.  The problem with th is is that all ground wires
behind the panel have to come through the firewall to bestacked on the few ground studs.  This is poor practice.  Asingle stud is responsible for many grounds . . . a broken boltor loose nut causes problems in multiple systems. Theground bus  I've illustrated is a special product I designedand asked B&C Specialty Products [1] to manufacture.Forty eight, .25" wide, Fast-On-on tabs are sweat soldered toa piece of sheet brass about 1.5" wide and 6" long.  A 5/16"stud is soldered to one end.  There are enough ground points