AeroElectric Connection                                                                                                                                         Grounding
                                                                             Page 5-5                                                                                  04/00Figure 5-2. Forest of Fast-On Tabs Firewall Groundblock.
Note:
You might be tempted to build this tool using a spring
clip type battery holder for the D-cell . . . because of
the large current that flows while taking a measure-
ment, spring loaded holders are inadequate to the task.
Solder wires right to the cell.Install bolt (2) with first nut (6).    Torque this feller downgood.  The remaining nut (6) is used to install a firewall tocrankcase bond strap or wire (7). Except for rare special grounding cases, everything in theairplane will ground to one side or the other of this system.This single-point system of grounding will provide the mosttrouble free, electrically quiet installation possible.
HOW GOOD IS IT?
Measuring the quality of any low resistance conductor pathswould appear to be difficult.  After all, not even RadioShack sells ohmmeters that read out in fractions ofmilliohms . . . at least not that they would know about!  Afew years ago I  was investigating an accident whereelectrical conductivity was in question:  measurements in themilliohm range were called for.  I visited a local RadioShack and bought two digital multimeters. One needed to becapable of reading current on the order of 5 to 10 amperes.The other was for reading millivolts; hopefully to the nearest0.1 millivolt.  I also purchased a D-size alkaline cell, some18 gauge lamp cord, test probes and banana plugs.  The manbehind the counter loaned me a soldering iron and I built therig shown in Figure 5-3, Poor-Man's 4-Wire Milliohmmeter.
Touching the two probes together places a dead short in the
D-cell . . . well, almost a dead short. Obviously, the cell hasan internal impedance which limits the current that a shortedcell will deliver.  The wire between cell and probes hassome resistance too.  As it turns out, when the two probesare touched together, multimeter M1 indicates about 6 amps.Now, observe that the
other multimeter is setup to measure thevoltage between thetwo probes through apath that isindependent of theD-cell current path.The operative featurehere is that no voltagedrop will occur alongthe voltage senseleads and multimeterM2 will read thevoltage between thetwo probes irre-spective of thevoltage dropped alongthe D-cell currentpath. 
The leadwires in this case had to be long enough to reach
from battery in tailcone to crankcase.  Obviously, themeasurement requires two people as well. When I pushedone probe down very firmly on the battery minus terminalbolt while probing the crankcase with the other, a current onthe order of 6 amps flowed in the ground path betweenbattery minus and crankcase.  Let's assume the M1 reads 5.8amps voltmeter reads 30.6 millivolts.  Ohms law sez ohms =volts/amps so .0306/6 = .0051 or 5.1 milliohms.  H mmmmm
. . . 200 amps through this path will drop 1.2 volts . . . . notgreat but probably typical.
Yeah . . . I know.  There are some pretty nifty clamp-on type
ammeters for DC current. Why not just measure startercurrent and the voltage drop while cranking?  Severalreasons. First, starter current is anything but steady.Compression strokes cause it to oscillate in a manner thatprevent good readings from a digital instrument.  For thesame reason, voltage-drop readings jump around insympathy with current fluctuations. Second, and mostimportantly, I don't like working around swinging propellerseven if the plugs ARE disconnected. I was there toinvestigate an accident, not participate in one! A third reasonwas that this airplane was all wrapped up in a wad ofaluminum, the prop was bent and the battery was dead.  An