Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
JINCH-POUND1
MIL-W-5088L
10 May 1991
SUPERSEDING
MIL-1+-5088K
24 December 1984
MILITARY
 SPECIFICATION
WRING, AEROSPACE VEHICLE
This specification is amroved for use by all Departments
and Agencies of the Dep&rtment of Defense.
1.
 SCOPE
1.1
 Scope. This specification covers all aspects from the selectlon through
installation of wiring and wiring devices used in aerospace vehicles.
 Aerospace
vehicles include airplanes, helicopters, lighter-than-air vehicles, and missiles.
1.1.1 Application.
 This specification establishes design requirements
guidance for wiring of aerospace vehicles.
 Although many of the requirements are
written as mandatory and shall be considered as such, there is also con- slderable
material which is intended to denote optional, preferential or guidance type
requirements.
 In interpreting the material contained herein, it is intended that
the philosophy of the entire document be considered for the wiring of each new
type of vehicle. This philosophy Is safety of the personnel, safety of the
vehicle, satisfactory performance and reliability of the vehicle and ease of
maintenance, and service llfe all at the least cost to the Government.
 The intent
of this document will be fulfilled by tailoring the requirements in each new type
or class of aerospace vehicle designed, to the proper application.
2.
 APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS
2.1
 Government documents.
2.1.1
 Specifications, standards and handbooks.
 Unless otherwise
specified, the following specifications, standards and handbooks of the Issue
llsted in that issue of the Department of Defense Index of Specifications and
Standards (DODISS) specified in the solicitation form a part of this speclfl-
catlon to the extent speclfled herein.
--
Beneficial comments (recommendations, additions, deletions) and any pertinent
data which may be of use in improving this document should be addressed to:
Commanding Officer, Naval Air Engineer~ng Center, Systems Engineering and
Standardization Department (Code 53), Lakehurst, NJ 08733-5100,
 by using the
self-addressed Standardization Document Improvement Proposal (DO Form 1426)
appearing at the end of this document or by letter.
AMSC N/A
 AREA GDRQ
DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A.
 Approved for publlc release; distribution
 is unlimited.
SPECIFICATIONS
●
MILITARY
MIL-I-631
MIL-I-3190
MIL-C-3607
MIL-C-3643
MIL-C-3650
MIL-C-3655
MIL-B-5087
MIL-E-6051
MIL-C-6136
MIL-E-7080
MIL-T-7099
MIL-F-7179
MIL-I-7444
MIL-C-7762
MIL-B-7883
MIL-T-7928
MIL-S-8516
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
Insulation, Electrical, Synthetic-Resin
 Composi-
tion, Nonrfgld
Insulation
 Sleeving, Electrical, Flexible,
Coated, General Specification for
Connector, Coaxial, Radio Frequency, Series
Pulse, General Specification for
Connectors, Coaxial, Radio Frequency, Series HN
Associated Flttlngs, General Speclflcat\on for
Connectors, Coaxial, Radio Frequency, Series LC
Connector, Plug and Receptacle, Electrical
(Coaxial, Series Twin), and Associated Fittings,
General Speclflcation for
Bonding, Electrical, and Llghtlng Protection,
for Aerospace Systems
Electromagnetic Compatibility
 Requirements,
Systems
Conduit, Electrical, Flexible, Shielded,
Aluminum Alloy for Aircraft Installations
Electric Equipment, Aircraft
 Selection and
Installation of
Terminal, Lug and Splice, Cr mp Style Aluminum,
for Alumlnum Aircraft N\re
Finishes, Coatings, and Sealants for the
ProtectIon of Aerospace ldeapons Systems, General
Speclflcatlon for
Insulation Sleeving, Electrical, Flexible
Compass, Installation of
Brazing of Steels, Copper, Copper Alloys, Nickel
Alloys, Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys
Terminals, Lug and Splice, Crimp Style, Copper
Sealing Compound, Polysulflde Rubber, Electrlc
Connectors and Electric Systems, Chemically Cured
2
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-I+5088L
SPECIFICATIONS
 (continued)
MILITARY
 (continued)
MIL-I-8700
MIL-C-22520
MIL-H-22759
MIL-I-23053
MIL-S-23190
MIL-S-23586
MIL-I-23594
MIL-M-24041
MIL-C-25516
MIL-C-26637
MIL-C-39012
MIL-C-39029
MIL-T-43435
●
MIL-C-49142
●
 MIL-A-5533!I
Installation and Test of Electronic Equipment in
Aircraft, General Specification for
Crimping Tools, Terminal, Hand or Power
Actuated, Wire Termination and Tool Kits,
General Specification for
Wire, Electric, Fluoropolymer-i nsulated, Copper
or Copper A11oY
Insulation Sleeving, Electrical, Heat Shrink-
able, General Speclflcatlon for
Straps, Clamps and Mounting Hardware, Plastic
and Metal for Cable Harness Tying and Support
Sealing Compound, Electrical, Sillcone Rubber,
Accelerator Required
Insulation Tape, Electrical, High Temperature,
Polytetrafluoroethylene, Pressure-sensitive
Molding and Potting Compound, Chemically Cured
Polyurethane
Connectors, Electrical, Miniature, Coaxial,
Environment-resistant Type, General Specifica-
tion for
Connector, Coaxial, Radto Frequency, Series LT,
General Specification for
Connectors, Coaxial, Radio Frequency, General
Specification for
Contacts, Electrical Connector, General Spec-
Iffcatlon for
Tape, Lacing and Tying
Connector, Plug and Receptacle, Electrical,
Trlaxial, Radio Frequency, General Specification
for
Adapter, Connector, Coaxial, Radio Frequency,
(Between Series and Within Series), General
Specification for
3
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-i&5088L
SPECIFICATIONS
 (continued)
MILITARY (continued)
MIL-M-81260
MIL-W-81381
MIL-T-81490
MIL-T-81714
MIL-T-81714/11
MIL-T-81714/12
MIL-S-81824
●
 MIL-C-83517
MIL-S-83519
biIL-C-85049
MIL-C-85485
●
 MIL-S-85848
STANDARDS
FEDERAL
FED-STD-595
MILITARY
DOD-STD-100
MIL-STD-454
Manual, Technical, Aircraft/System/Equipment
Maintenance
Hire, Electric, Polyimide-i nsulated, Copper and
Copper Alloy
Transmission
 Lines, Transverse Electromagnetic
Mode
Terminal Junction System (TJS), Environment-
reslstant, General Speciflcatlon for
Terminal Junction System (TJS), Terminal
Junction Blocks, Sectional, Wire In-Line
Junctions, Sfngle, Series I
Terminal Junction System (TJS), Terminal
Junction Blocks, Sectional, Hire In-Line
Junctions, Double, Series I
Splice, Electric, Permanent, Crimp Style,
Copper, Insulated, Environment-resistant
Connector, Coaxial, Radio Frequency for Coaxial,
Strip or Mlcrostrip Transmission Line, General
Specification for
Shield Termination, Solder Style, Insulated,
Heat-shrinkable, Environment-1 esistant, General
Speclflcatlon for
Connector Accessories,
 Electr
 cal,
 General
Speciflcatlon for
Cable, Electric, Fi’ter Line, Rad’to Frequency
Absorptive
Sleeving, For Ident fication Marking, Heat
Shrinkable, General Speclficatlon For
Colors Used in Government Procurement
Engineering Drawing Practices
Standard General Requirements for Electronic
Equipment
4
Downloaded..
.
STANDARDS (continued)
MILITARY (continued)
MIL-STD-681
MIL-STD-704
DOD-STD-863
●
 MIL-STD-889
●
 MIL-STD-970
MIL-STD-1353
MIL-STD-1388
MIL-STD-1553
MS3373
MS 18029
MS21266
MS21919
MS25171
?4S25274
MS25281
MS25435
)4S25436
kiS25437
from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-50B8L
Identification Coding and Application of Hookup
and Lead Hire
A~rcraft Electric Power Characteristics
Wiring Data and System Schematic Diagrams,
Preparation of
Dissimilar Metals
Standards and Speclflcat\ons, Order of
Preference for the SelectIon of
Electrical Connectors, Plug-in Sockets and
Associated Hardware, SelectIon and USe Of
Logistfc Support Analysis
Digital Time Division Command/Response,
Multiplex Data Bus
Strip, Mounting,
 Nut Insulating, for MS27212
Terminal Board
Cover Assembly,
 Electrical, for MS27212 Terminal
Board Assembly
Grommet, Plastlc, Edging
Clamp, Loop-Type, Cushioned, Support
Nipple, Electrical Terminal
Cap, Electrical (Hire End, Crimp Style, Type II,
Class 1), for 105*C Total Conductor Temperature
Clamp, Loop-Plastic,
 Hire Support
Terminal, Lug, Crimp Style, Straight Type, for
Aluminum Aircraft Hire, Class 1
Terminal, Lug, Crimp Style, 90” Upright Type,
for Aluminum Aircraft Wire, Class 1
Terminal, Lug, Crimp Style, Left Angle Type, for
Aluminum Aircraft Wire, Class 1
5
-———
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
STANDARDS (continued)
MILITARY (continued)
MS25438
 Terminal, Lug, Crimp Style, Right Angle Type,
for Aluminum Aircraft Hire, Class 1
MS25439
 Spllce, Permanent, Crimp Style, 2 Nay Type for
Aluminul Aircraft Hire, Class 1
!4S25440
 Masher, for Use tllth Aircraft Aluminum Terminals
MS27212
 Termina’ Board Assembly, Molded-In Stud, Electric
MS27488
 Plug, End Seal, Electrical Connector
MS33540
 Safety Hiring and Cotter Pinning, General
Practices for
MS35489
 Grommet, Synthetic and Silicone Rubber, Hot 011
and Coolant Resistant
MS90376
 Cap, Dust, Plastic, Electric Connector
MS90387
 Tool, Hand, Adjustable,
 for Plastic Tiedown
Straps
AND1038O
 Coupllng Installations,
 Standard Conduit,
Electrical
HANDBCXXS
MILITARY
MIL-HDBK-216
 RF Transmlsslon Lines and Fittings
ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS
Additional documents pertaining to the selection of wire and cables are
lfsted In Appendix A.
*(Unless otherwise Indicated, copies of federal and military specifications,
standards and handbooks are available from the Standardlzatlon Documents Order
Desk, Bldg. 40, 700 Robbins Avenue. Phtladelphla, PA 19111-5094. )
●
 2.2 Non-Government publications.
 The following documents form a part of
this document to the extent spec~fied herein. Unless otherwise spec~fled, the
issues of the documents which are DOD adopted are those listed in the issue of
the DODISS cited In the solicitation. Unless otherwise specified, the issues
of documents not listed in the DODISSare the Issues of the documents cited In
the solicitation
 (see 6.2).
6
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
t41L-W-5088L
AEROSPACE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION OF AMERICA, INC.
 (AIA)
NAS 813
 Cap - Protective Electrical Connector
NAS 820
 P?ug - Protective Electrical Connector
(Application for copies should be addressed to the Aerospace Industries
Assoc’tation of America, Inc., 1250 Eye Street, N.H., Washington, DC 20005.)
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (ANSI)
Y14.15
 1966
 Electrical and Electronics Diagrams
Y32 .2
1975
Graphic Symbols for Electrical and Electronics
Diagrams
Y32.16
1975
Reference Designations for Electrical and
Electronic Parts and Equipment
(Application for copies should be addressed to the American Natlf nal Standards
Institute, Inc., 1430 Broadway, New York, NY 10018-3308.)
(Industry association specifications and standards are generally available for
reference from libraries. They are also distributed among techn cal groups
and using Federal agencies.)
2.3 Order of precedence.
 In the event of a conflict between the text of
this document and the references cited herein (except for related associated
detail speclficatlons, specification sheets, or military standards), the text
of this document takes precedence.
 Nothing in this document, however,
supersedes appl~cable laws and regulations unless a specific exemption has
been obtained.
3.
 REQUIREMENTS
3.? Terminology interpretation.
 The term “wiring” wherever used
throughout this specification shall be Interpreted In accordance with 6.3.5.
3.1.1 Oevtations.
 Deviations from this specification desired by the
contractor (substitution of equipment, material or installation) shall be
specifically brought to the attention of the procuring actlvlty by letter
concurrent with or prior to forwarding the design data for approval.
 Al 1
requests for deviations shall Include-sufficient engineering ‘nformation to
substantiate the deviations.
---
3.2 Conflicting requirements.
 In case of discrepancies between this
specification and the type or detail specification for a part cular vehicle
part, the type or detail specification shall prevail.
●
 3.3 Selection of parts and materials.
 Parts and materials covered by
documents listed
 herein are standard and shall be used whenever they are
suitable for the purpose. Parts and materials shall be procured fromQPL
sources when they exist. Nonstandard parts and materials must be equivalent
to or better than similar standard parts and materials.
 Mhen this specifica-
tion fails to provide an applicable specification or standard, the contractor
shall use other established speclflcatlons or standards in the order of
precedence set forth in MIL-STO-970.
 Parts and materials selected from other
than this specification are not standard, and approval must be obtained prior
7
——————
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
to their use in aerospace vehicles. Each vendor source for a nonstandard part
or mater~al requires approval.
 When a nonstandard part is used where a
suitable standard part exists, the contractor shall reference the standard
part on the drawing, parts lists, or data package, and the Installation shall
provide for replacement with the standard part.
-
3.3.1 ~ests
 for app roval of nonstandard parts. The data to be sub-
mitted with the request for approval of nonstandard parts shall be in
accordance with the terms of the contract.
3.3.2 Connnercial utllltyp arts. (hmnercial utility parts, such as
screws, bolts, nuts, cotter pins, etc., may be used, provided they have
suitable properties and are replaceable by standard parts without alteration.
3.3.3 Contractor’s specifications.
 Hlr!ng and wirtng devices conforming
to contractor’s specifications may be used, provided each contractor’s spec-
ification is approved by the procuring activity and provided no military
specification exists.
 The contractor shall provide substantiating test data
and, when required by the procuring activity, shall provide samples for test.
The use of contractor’s specifications shall not constitute waiver of Govern-
ment inspections. Contractor’s speclflcatlons shall follow the format for
milttary specifications.
 When a detail or general military specification
exists for the class of material required, the contractor’s specification
shall reference
 the existing mllltary specification and set forth only the
needed new requirements and deviations.
3.3.4 Comnmalltv.
 An object~ve in the selection of parts shall be to
maxim!ze conmnonallty and m~nimlze the variety of wiring components and related
servicing tools required In the construction, installation and maintenance of
the electrical wiring system.
3.3.5 Government-furnished Aircraft Equipment (GFAE). Wlrlng and wiring
devices furnished by the Government shall be Installed without modification
unless otherw!se authorized or directed by the procuring activity.
3.3.6 Modification.
 The contractor shall not alter, rework or mod~fy
wiring or wiring dev#ces built to and meeting Government specfficatlons,
unless authorized or d~rected by the procuring activity, and such modification
shall be subject to Government InspectIon. Modified parts shall have the
Government Identlfylng part number removed and shall be identified by
contractor part number.
3.4 Service life. The wiring and associated components used for the
wirina Installation shall be so selected and installed to promote ease of
malnt~nance and high reliability over the entire expected service life of the
vehicle. The rellab< llty and maintainability goals for the wiring system will
be determined in the Logistic Support Analysts as delineated in MIL-STD-1388
as wI1l the expected service life. These goals shall be subject to Procur~n9
activity approval.
3.5 Smoke and fire hazards. Wiring and wiring devices shall be selected
and installed In such a manner as to minimize the danger of smoke and fire
hazards. Adequate protective means, both physical and electrical, shall be
employed to provide reliability and safety commensurate with this requirement.
a
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-N-5088L
.—
3.6 Matertals.
 Materials used in the installation of wiring and equip-
ment shall be suitable for the purpose and shall conform to such Government
specifications as are specifically applicable under the contract.
3.6.1 Metals.
 Metals used in the Installation of wiring shall be
corroston resistant or shall be suitably protected to resist corrosion and
electrolytic action during normal service life. Finish and coating shall be
in accordance with MIL-F-7179.
●
3.6.1.1 Dissimilar metals.
 Dlssimllar metals used shall conform to the
requirements of MIL-STD-889.
 This standard establishes requirements for the
selectlon and protection of dissimilar metal combinations and other
sign!flcant corrosion behavtor factors.
3.6.2 Nonmetals.
 Nonmetals used, including plastlcs, fabrics and
protective finishes, shall be moisture and flame resistant, shall not support
fungus growth, shall not support combustion, and shall not be adversely
affected by weathering, applicable fluids and propellants, temperature and
ambient condlt~ons encountered during operation of the vehicle.
 hlater~als
that give off a minimum amount of noxious gases shall be selected.
 Nonmetals
may be treated to conform to this requirement.
3.6.2.1 Insulating materials.
 Insulating materials shall have an arc
resistance capability wh~ch will meet the circuit requirements.
3.6.3 Seallngmaterlals.
 Only materials that are elastomeric and
reversion resistant shall be used. Sealing materials required to seal wire
junctions and terminations shall be selected from MIL-S-8516, NIL-S-23586, or
other material specifically approved by the procuring activity.
 MIL-S-8516 IS
the preferred material.
 The followlng temperature limlts apply (the upper
limlt Includes ambient plus temperature rise):
MIL-S-8516
MIL-S-23586
-51°C (-60”F) to 93°C (200*F)
-65°C (-85°F) to232°C
 (450°F)
3.6.3.1 Process.
 Sealtng materials shall be applied In strict
conformance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
 Overage material shall not
be used. The sealtng material shall be held In place by suitable forms during
the cur!ng process.
3.7 Component select~on and installation.
 Components and wlrlng devices
shall be suitable for their application and selected and installed in
accordance with the requirements of this specif~cation.
 In addltlon,
selectton and installation considerations shall be made relat~ve to vehicle
operation and servlclng environments to ensure that they are not subjected to
conditions exceeding the limits specified in the applicable wiring component
speclftcations.
3.7.1 Maintenance considerations.
 The maintainability of the wiring
system shall be a prime consideration in the selection, design and installa-
tion of harnesses, cable assemblies and wiring system components.
 All wiring
shall be accessible, repairable and replaceable at the maintenance level
L
 speclfled by the procuring activity. Other specific requirements concerning
maintenance are specified in the appropriate paragraph on the subject.
9
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
3.8 Hiring selection,
 Wirfng shall be of a type suitable for the
application.
 Mire shall be selected so that the rated maximum conductor
temperature Is not exceeded for any combination of electrical loadlng, ambient
temperature, and heating effects of bundles, conduit and other enclosures.
Typical factors to be considered in the selection are voltage, current,
ambient temperature, mechanical strength, abrasion, flexure and pressure
altltude requirements, and extreme environments such as Severe Iifndand
Motsture Problem (SHAI!P) areas or locations susceptible to significant fluid
concentrations.
 The wire shall be selected in accordance with Append~x A of
this speclflcat!on.
 The wire selectlon shall take tnto account all require-
ments of this specification and the followlng design considerations.
3.8.1 Elevated temperature deqradatton.
 Degradation of tin and stlver
plated copper conductors wI1l occur If they are exposed to continuous opera-
tion at elevated temperatures.
 These effects shall be taken \nto account In
the selectton and application of wlrlng.
3.8.1.? Ttn plated conductors.
 Tin-copper intermetallics will form
resultlng In an increase ~n conductor resistance.
 The increase js Inverse to
s!ze, being up to 4 percent for the smallest gage.
3.8.1.2 Silver plated conductors.
 Degradation In the form of inter-
strand bonding, silver migration, and ox#dation of the copper strands wI1l
occur w~th continuous operation near rated temperature, resulting In 10SS of
flexlblllty.
 Due to potential fire hazard, silver plated conductors shall not
be used In areas where they are sub~ect to contamination by ethylene glycol
solutlons. These condltioris should be considered In the aPPllcat~on of wirin9
using these conductors.
3.8.1.3 Solderab!llty.
 Both tin plated and silver plated copper
conductors will exhlblt poor solderabtllty after exposure to continuous
elevated temperature.
 Compensating steps shall be Included in maintenance
procedures for reterminatlon.
-
3.8.2 Aluminum wire. The use of aluminum wire requires procuring
activity approval. Aluminum wire shall be restricted to size 8 and larger.
Alumlnum wire shall neither be directly attached to engine-mounted accessories
nor \nstalled fn other areas of severe vlbratlon.
 It shall not be installed
where frequent connections and disconnections are required.
 All installations
of aluminum wire shall be relatively permanent.
 Alum~num wire shall not be
used where the length of run Is less than 3 feet, nor In areas where corrosive
fumes exist. Aluminum wire shall be terminated only by terminations
specifically approved for thfs application (see 3.20.2).
*
3.8.3
 Deleted.
*
3.8.4 Coaxial cables. Coaxial cables shall be su table for the applica-
tion and shall be selected in accordance with 30,1.5 of Appendlx A. For
applications above 400 MHz and in critical RF circuits, critical electrical
characteristics such as attenuation, capacitance, strut’ ural return loss,
environmental requirements, short leads and grounding shall be considered In
design.
 MIL-HDBi(-216 shall be used as a guide in their selection.
 Coaxial
cable operating in the Transverse Electromagnetic Mode (TEM) and coaxial cable
10
_-
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
..
with tubular metal outer surfaces shall be identified by a violet colored
marker (1 inch nominal width) at intervals not greater than 24 inches of
length and within 6 Inches of termination.
 Transmlsslon llnes In accordance
with MIL-T-81490 need not be identlf!ed by colored markers if the color
requirements of MIL-T-81490 have been met.
●
 3.8.5 Harnesses.
 Harnesses shall be of either open or protected
design. Open harnesses are preferred for maintenance considerations.
Harnesses may be designed to meet mechanical or shielding requirements.
 The
use of protected harnesses shall be avoided unless wir~ng design
considerations dictate their use and Is subject to the approval of the
procuring activ~ty.
 The design details of protected harnesses are also
subject to the approval of the procuring activity.
3.8.6 Insulation compatlbtllty with sealing and servlcinq.
 Miring
terminations in devices where the wiring must be sealed to provide an
environment-resistant joint, shall have insulation compatible with the sealing
feature of the device.
 Elastomer grommets are generally qualified to seal on
wires having smooth extruded insulations.
 Only one wire per gronunet hole is
permitted. Sealing on tape wrapped, braided, striped, or other than smooth
circular insulations shall be specifically tested for compatibility and shall
be subject to procuring activity approval, unless compatibility has been
demonstrated in the qualification of the terminating device. After installa-
tion in the vehicle, the Integrity of the sealing features of all such devices
shall be intact, and able to perform their function.
 A device shall be
considered as sealed if the outermost sealing feature (web) Is in full
 contact
with the device when visually inspected.
 The wiring shall be installed so
that transverse loads will not destroy the integrity of the sealing feature of
the wire.
3.8.6.1 Wire diameter.
 The finished wire outside diameter shall be
within the limits specified for the grommet specified in the appropriate
component specification and shall net exceed the capability of contact
servicing tools to tnsert and release contacts.
*
3.8.6.2 Pottlncj seal on wire. The potting shall be bonded to the outer-
most surface of the wire or cable in such a way to ensure an envlronmental-
res!stant seal.
3.8.6.3 Insulation degradation.
 Wtrlng shall be handled, stripped and
Installed so as not to distort, roughen or damage the insulation on which
sealing is to be effected.
 Methods-of marking and identification shall be
applled so as not to provide a track for moisture entry. The impression left
on the insulation of shielded and twisted wires can also cause unacceptable
degradation of the insulation in relation to the elastomer seal. Caution
shall be used to avoid this condition.
3.8.7 Corona prevention.
 In the selection of wiring, considerations
shall be given to the prevention of corona discharge.
 Useful information
relating to corona prevention is contained In 6.6 and should be reviewed prior
to the selection of all wiring.
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
●
3.8.8 MInlmum wire size. This spectficatton permits the use of size 22
wire as the minlmurn wire size for a{rr)lanes, helicopters and lighter-than-air
vehicles, and prohtbits size 24 and s&ller”gages
 (see 3.8.8.3 For missiles).
This restriction in aerospace vehicle applications Is due to maintenance
difficulties.
-
●
3.8.8.1 Current carrying capac~ty. A guideline for the continuous
current in each wire is shown in table 1. Table I assumes an ambient tempera-
ture of 70”C, a harness or harness branch of 33 or more wires for sizes 26
through 10, and 9 wires for size 8 and larger, carrying 20 percent or less of
rated harness or harness branch current and operating at an altitude of 60,000
feet. The use of this tabulation shall not eliminate other requirements for
wire selectlon.
 Data from figures 3, 4 and 5 may be used for determining wire
size for conditions other than those contained In table 1, The use of table I
and figures 3, 4 and 5 shall not eliminate other requirements for wire
selectlon.
●
3.8.8. 1.1 Wlrlnq In harnesses.
 Table I current ratings for wires In
harnesses are based upon 33 or more wires for sizes 26 through 10 and 9 wires
for stze 8 and larger operating at 60,000 feet altitude, and an ambient
temperature of 70”C. The total current carried by the harness shall not be
more than 20 percent of the numerical total obtained by adding the carrying
capacities taken from table I (or calculated from figures 3, 4 and 5 for
ambients, altitudes or harness loading factors differing from those assumed in
table I), for the appropriate wire construction temperature rating for all the
wires in the harness.
 For example, If a wire harness contains 33 size 20
wires rated at 200°C, the numerical total Is 330 amperes, 20 percent of which
Is 66 amperes and the maximum allowable total current in the harness Is 66
amperes and the maximum allowable current for any size 20 wire In the harness
is 10 amperes. A cable in a harness shall be treated as a number of
individual wires equal to the number of conductors In the cable, excludlng
shields.
In smaller harnesses, the allowable percentage of total current may be
Increased as the harness approaches the single wire configuration.
 The
harness ratings contained in table I were derived from figures
 3, 4 and 5.
Single wires In free alr ratings for copper wire were determined at
 T
(200’C -70’C) (for alumlnum wire derate the free air rating of copper wtre by
20 percent) and derated for (a) operation at 60,000 feet altitude, (b)
harnesses of 33 wires or more, and (c) carrying 20 percent or less of rated
harness current.
 For conditions other than (a) through (c), refer to 6.7.
3.8.8. 1.2 Hire terminations.
 The continuous current ratings of table I
were derived only for wire application, and cannot be applled directly to
associated wire termination devices (e.g., connector contacts, relays, circuit
breakers, switches).
 The current ratings are llmited by the design character-
istics of the devtce.
 Care shall be taken to ensure that the continuous
current value chosen for a particular system circuit shall not create hot
spots within any circuit element which leads to premature failure.
 Acceptable
temperature levels of circuit components shall be those defined by the
particular circuit component specification.
12
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-l&5088L
*
3.8.8.2 Amb~ent temperature.
 The contractor shall ensure that the
maximum ambient temperature that the wire bundles will be subjected to, plus
the temperature rtse due to the wire current loads, does not exceed the
maximum conductor temperature rating found in Appendix A in tables A-I and
A-II . Figures 3, 4 and 5 may be used to determine the appropriate current
loads when the following conditions are known: maximum ambient temperature,
maximum conductor temperature, maximum altitude and the number of wires in a
bundle. See example in 6.7 for method of calculation.
●
3.8.8 3 Missile wiring application.
 For missiles only, use of size 24
high tensi’ e strength copper alloy wire is permitted when bundled with other
wires.
3.8.8 4 Voltaqe drop. For power distribution circuits, the total
Impedance of supply and return paths shall be such that the voltage at the
load equipment terminals is within the limits of MIL-STD-704.
3.8.9 Maintainability.
 Wire selectlon shall be affected by considera-
tions of the types and frequency of maintenance action.
3.8.10 Nirincj selection for special applications.
 The general purpose
wires llsted in Appendix A do not perform equally In all applications.
 The
detail characteristics of the specific wire’types shall be considered for the
following special applications.
●
 3.8. 10.1 Severe wind and moisture problems (SHAMP). Suitable wire types
in accordance with MIL-W-22759 are Dreferred for severe wind and moisture
problems (SWAMP) or both. Appllcat\ons include wheel wells, near wing flaps,
wing folds and pylons.
3.8.10.2 Frequency flexure. Suitable w~re types selected from
MIL-N-22759 are preferred for areas that require repeated bending and flexing
of the wiring.
3.8.10.3 Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) and Electromagnetic
Vulnerabll~ty (EMV) sensitive areas. MIL-C-8S485 Is preferred for use in EMI
and EIOIsensltlve areas.
●
 3.8. 10.4 Thermocouple wlrlng.
 The followlng
 is required when using
thermocouple wires (see 6.8):
a.
b.
The use of thermocouple contacts is discouraged and should be
used only If essential to meet system requirements, such as
thermal gradient conditions.
 Crimp terminations are preferred.
TransitIon from thermocouple wires to copper wires are per-
mitted with the environmental sealed connectors specified in
3.14.1 or MIL-T-81714/12, type 2 in-line junction.
 When
gold-plated crimping pairs are used, precautions should be
taken to ensure that the connector external temperature ambient
and internal hotspot temperature is such that both the wire to
contact junctions for the thermocouple wires within the
connector are at the same temperature.
13
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
c.
Spliclng of thermocouple wire shall be avoided.
 If splicing is
necessary (see 3.19) a MIL-T-81714/12, type 2 dual in-line
junction (splice) or MIL-T-81714/11 single in-line junctton
(spllce) or MIL-S-81824/l spllce shall be used.
d.
The connector, in-line junction, or spllce shall provide an
environmental seal on the thermocouple w!re. The tensile
characteristics of the contact)thermocouple combination shall
be equal to or greater than the tensile characteristics of the
thermocouple wire.
*
3.9 Wire and cable identification.
 Each wire and cable shall be marked
with an identification code on the jacket or sleeving of the wire and cable.
Hot stamp marking of wire and cable shall not be used upless other marking
methods are not compatible with wire or cable insulation.
3.9.1 Assignment of Identification code. The identification code for
wiring shall be slqnificant or nonslqn!ficant In accordance with AoDendlx B or
C, as-specified by-the procuring act~vity.
3.9.2
 Deleted.
3.9.3
 Marklnq,
3.9.3.1 The wire identification code shall be printed to read
hor zontally from left to right or vertica’ ly from top to bottom. See figures
8-1 and B-2.
3.9.3.2 The characters shall be legible and permahent and the method of
identification shall not impair the characteristics of the wiring.
●
3.9.3.3 Wiring shall be identified, throughout its length, at intervals
not longer than 3 inches, as measured from the end of a mark to the begtnning
of the next mark.
*
3.9.3.3.1
 bihen it Is not possible to print d~rectly upon a wire or
cable, an identification marker shall be used. The marker shall be a
MIL-S-85848 or MIL-I-23053 heat-shrinkable sleeve; a MIL-S-23190 (MS3368
Identification strap, see 3.11.3.8) or a MIL-I-3190 glass braid. The marker
shall not be used as an electrical insulating device. The markers shall be
used as follows:
d
(NOTE: tIiIL-S-23190(MS3368) identification strap shall not
be used within cables, groups, harnesses or bundles, )
a.
Cables upon which identification cannot be printed shall be
identified by printing the identification code (and individual
wire color, where applicable) on a markqr placed external to
the outer covering at the term~natlng end or a common jacket
shall be identified with printed markers at each end and at
intervals not greater than 3 feet. Individual wires within a
cable shall be identified wlthln 3 inches from their
termination.
14
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
b.
c.
Wires on which identification cannot be marked shall be
identified by printed markers at each end and at Intervals not
greater than 3 feet.
Wires for which the Identifications are reassigned after
installation In the aircraft may be reidentlfied by markers at
the termination of each wire segment.
 It is not necessary to
reidentify such wires throughout their lengths.
3.9.3.3.2
 Short wires and cables less than 6 Inches In length need not
be identified In the aircraft, but shall be completely Identified on the
drawing.
3.9.3.3.3
 For developmental mdel aircraft, wiring identlf~cat~on
 may be
provided at junction and termination points only.
●
3.9.3.3.4
 For protected harnesses and shielded, jacketed multi-conductor
cables and when using nonsignificant wire identiflcatlon, color coding or its
alphanumeric equivalent may be interchanged within the same harness. The
alphanumeric equivalent of the color code shall be in accordance with
MIL-STD-681.
 See paragraph 30.2.3.3 in Appendix C for an example of a}pha-
numerlc equivalent of color coding.
3.9.4 Connector Identlficatlon.
 Connectors shall be identified to
facilitate mating.
 All plugs shall have a nonmetallic band affixed to the
wire group, cable or harness. This band shall bear the P and J number
identification of both the plug and the mating receptacle and the equ~pment
nomenclature.
 The band shall be w~thln 6 inches of the plug. All receptacles
shall be Ident!fled with a “J” number on both sides of the structure, adjacent
to the receptacle.
 Receptacles, such as test and power, to which a matfng
plug Is not attached, shall have, fn addition, the function of the receptacle
identified on the plug staleof the structure.
●
 3.9.5 Hire s~ze color code system. kihen approved by the procuring
activity, a wire size color code system as specified be?ow may be used to
facilitate control of the wire size. Hhen a wire size color code Is used, the
wire Insulation shall be Identified with the appropriate color by one of the
follovdng methods. Only one method may be used for each vehicle.
a.
b.
c.
Solid colored.
Dlstlnctlvely
 color banded.
Dlstlnctlvely
 striped.
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-ki-5088L
The wire s~ze color code is as follows:
●
Size
 Color
 Size
 Co 1or
26
 Black (see 3.8.8)
 10
 Brown
Blue (see 3.8.8)
 8
 Red
:;
 Green
 6
 Blue
20
 Red
 4
 Yellow
18
 White
 2
 Red
16
 Blue
 1
 White
14
 Green
 o
 Blue
12
 Yellow
3.10 Wlrlng installation.
 Design of the wiring Installat on shall
conform to the following precedence:
1st
 -
 Safety in fllght.
2nd
 -
 The ease of maintenance,
 removal and replacement of the
w!rlng.
3rd
 -
 Cost effective aircraft production.
Wlrlng shall be fabricated and installed so as to achieve the follow!ng:
a.
 Maximum rellabllfty.
b.
 Minimum Interference and coupling between systems.
c.
 Acsesslbillty
 for inspection and maintenance.
d.
 PreventIon of damage.
The ease of maintenance, removal and complete replacement of wire harnesses
shall be given consideration In the wiring design.
3.10.1 Arranqementof
 wirlrq. Mrlng shall be arranged in groups and
bundles to facilitate installation and maintenance.
 Indlvldual groups shall
be spot tied, and when these groups are bundled the spot ties shall not be
removed.
●
 3.10.2
 Bundle and group size. As a design objective, bundles and groups
within clamps shall be no more than 2 inches in diameter.
 141rlng to high
density connectors may be run as a single group, provided all of the utrlng in
the group is pertinent to a single item, equipment or system.
3.10.2.1
 Hlqh density harness size. The number of wires In high density
harnesses shall be llmlted only by efficient and good design.
 The use of wire
sizes larger than 16 is discouraged unless there are also smaller wires in the
same harness.
16
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
3.10.3 Inspection and maintenance.
 In open wiring, groups shall be
installed to permit replacement of the group without removal of the bundle.
High density harnesses-shall be designed so that they are readily replaceable
in sect~ons.
3.10.4 Facility for changes.
 Hhere required by the procuring activity,
the wiring for specified systems shall be installed so as to be readily
removed and wiring for new systems readily installed, when system changes are
undertaken.
 The Installation of the wlrlng shall be such that only the equip-
ment and wiring related to the change have to be disturbed.
*
3.10.5 Dead ending.
 Each undesignated wire end shall be dead ended with
MS25274 caps or with Insulation in a manner acceptable to the procuring
activity.
 Dead ending shall take place within four to SIX inches of
connectors o~ feedthrough bushings.
3.10.6 Routlnq.
 Nlrlng shall be routed to ensure reliability and to
offer protection from the following hazards:
a.
 Chafing.
b.
 Use as handholds or as support for personal equipment.
c.
 Damage by personnel moving within the vehicle.
d.
 Damage by stowage or shifting of cargo.
e.
 Damage by battery or acid fumes and fluids.
f.
 Abrasion In wheel wells where exposed to rocks, ice, mud, etc.
9.
 Combat damage (to the maximum extent practicable).
h.
 Damage by moving parts.
t.
 Harsh environments such as SWAMP areas, high temperatures, or
areas susceptible to slgnlflcant fluid or fume concentration.
3.10.7 Slack in wlrinq.
 In addltlon to slack provided for drip loops
(3.11.8), slack shall also be provided to meet the requirements of 3.10.7.1
through 3.10.7.5. Slack requirements shall be met on every production vehicle
as well as experimental models.
 In production wire harness fabricat~on,
provisions shall be incorporated into the harness design and fabrication
process to ensure that the Installed harness meets these requirements without
the need for straining, forcing or modifying the harness.
3.10.7.1 Connector termination.
 When wtring is terminated In a
connector or terminal junction (excludlng RF connectors), a min~mum of 1 inch
of slack for complete connector replacement shall be provided.
 This slack
shall be between the connector and the second wjr~ng support clamp. The
I-Inch slack requirement shall be Interpreted to mean that with the connector
unmated and the first wiring support clamp loosened, the wiring will permit
17
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
the front end of the connector shell to extend 1 Inch beyond the point
normally required to properly mate the connector.
 Slack for replacement of
potted connectors shall be, as a minimum, the length of the potting plus one
inch.
-
3.10.7.2
 Lug termination.
 At each end of a wire terminated by a lug, a
minimum length of slack equal to twice the barrel length of the lug shall be
prov!ded.
 For copper wire, size 2 and larger,
 and alum~num wire, size 4 and
larger, the mlnlmum length of slack shall be equal to one barrel length of the
lug. The slack shall be In the vicinity of the lug and available fo~ replace-
ment of the lug by maintenance personnel.
3.10.7.3 Strain prevention.
 The wlrlng insta latlon shall be designed
to prevent strain on wires, junctions and supports.
3.10.7.4
 Free movement.
 The wiring installat on shall permit free move-
ment of shock and v!bration mounted equipment.
3.10.7.5 Wire shiftlnq.
 The wlrlng installation shall permit shifting
of wiring and equipment necessary to perform maintenance within the vehicle.
3.10.8 Electromagnetic compatibility.
 Hiring, including RF and antenna
cables, shall be routed so as to minimize electromagnetic Interference In
accordance with MIL-E-6051.
3.10.9
 Ignition. Flexlble metallic conduit of a type specifically
approved by the procuring activity shall be used for magneto cable clrcults.
Magneto ground cables (except the induction vibrator output cable) shall not
run through conduit or junction boxes containing other cables.
_
3.10.10 Compass deviation.
 Hiring and ground return paths shall be
installed so as not to cause a compass devlatton exceeding that allowed by
MIL-C-7762.
 Each wire carrying direct current in the area of compasses or the
sens~tive pickup elements of compasses shall have a corresponding ground
return wire twisted with it to neutralize the magnetic field.
3.10.11 Assembly.
 Lug terminated wire shall be Installed so as to
reduce human error In assembly to adjacent terminals,
 Control of wire length
fran tfe-down points, fanning strips, or different size stud holes are
preferred to dependence on code Identification.
3.10.12 Sensitive circuits.
 Sensitive circuits such as low-power level
signal circuits shall be kept separate from other clrcults at junctions.
 This
shall be accomplished by us~ttg separate connectors for the sensitive circuits
and by having at least one grounded terminal stud between sens!tive circuits
and other circuits on a cmn
 terminal board.
3.10.12.1
 Electroexploslve subsystem wlrlnq.
 All circuits associated
with electroexDlosive subsystems shall be routed in twisted shielded pairs.
All c~rcults and junctions-shall be shielded without discontinuities or gaps
In the shleldlng. Wire shields shall be bonded around the circumference of
connectors.
 All firing and control circuits associated with ordnance and
explosive subsystems shall be kept separate from other clrcults at junctions.
18
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
3.10.12.2
 Electroexploslve subsystem wiring (for Air Force use). All
firing and control circuits associated with ordnance and explosive subsystems
contained within junction boxes shall be coded with a red stripe in accordance
with FED-STD-595, color 11105.
3.10.13 Power systems.
 Electrically unprotected wiring of the primary
electrical power system shall not be bundled or grouped with distribution
circuit wiring. Wiring from two or more sources shall not be in the same
bundle or group to prevent a single damage from affecting more than one power
source.
3.10.14 Essential equipment.
 Hiring to each system which must operate
to maintain fllght control of the vehicle under normal or emergency condtt~ons
shall be separately routed from other wiring.
 Essential engine circuits shall
have their wiring so routed as to prevent damage to any circuit for one engine
from affecting circuits of any other engine.
 Propeller circuits shall be
routed separately from all other circuits.
3.10.15 Parallel circuits.
 The procuring activity may specify parallel
circuits for specific eauipment circuits and feeders to load centers.
 Wiring
to equipment performing ”duplicate functions shall be run in separate bundles
to prevent damage to one system affecting the other. On airborne vehicles
that employ dual or multiple redundant MIL-STD-1553 multiplex data bus
systems, the redundant data bus cables shall be run in separate bundles and
routed to prevent damage to one data bus cable affecting the operation of the
redundant data bus or buses.
3.10.16 High-temperature equipment.
 Hiring shall be kept separate from
high-temperature equipment, such as resistors, exhaust stacks, heating ducts
and de-icers, to prevent insulation deterloratton.
3.10.17 Nacelle wirinq.
 Hiring in an engine nacelle. from the point of
disconnection for removal of the engine, shall be interchangeable between all
engine installations having identical equipment and for the same series of
vehicle. A means for positively ascertaining clamp locations shall be
provided for wlrlng that must be unclamped for engine removal.
 This shall be
accomplished by permanently attaching clamp brackets to supporting parts.
3.10.18 Id\rlnq In bilges.
 Hiring in bilges shall be installed at least
6 inches from the centerline of the aircraft except where attachment to equip-
ment located in this area is required.
 Wire types susceptible to moisture
degradation shall not be used in bilges.
-..
3.10.~9
 Enqine mounted accessories.
 For direct attachment to engine
nounted accessories, wire smaller than size 20 shall not be used.
 Ilhen size
20 wires are used, they shall be high-strength alloy conductor and when
terminated in connectors, the connector shall provide support and prevent
stra!n on terminations.
 The wires shall be adequately grouped, spot tied and
supported.
3.10.20 Wheel well area!. Conduit or other protection shall be provided
for all wiring in wheel well areas.
 Flexible tubing, abrasion resistant tape
or braided outer jackets are acceptable for use where wiring is properly
19
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL++-50B8L
supported. Hhen tubing s used, drainage holes shall be provided at all trap
points and at the lowest point between each set of support clamps. Taping
shall be In accordance w th 3.11.6. Hire types susceptible to moisture
degradation shall not be used In wheel well areas.
*
3.10.21 Sllde mounted equipment.
 When connecting wires or cable to
sllde mounted equipment, sufficient wire or cable shall be provided to permit
the slide mounted equipment to slide in and out without damage, and permit
unmating of the connectors.
3.11 Protection and support.
 Wiring shall be supported to meet the
follow~ng requ~rements:
-
a.
 Prevent chafing as deftned in 6.3.8.
b.
Secure wiring where routed through bulkheads and structural
members.
c.
d.
e.
Properly group, support and route wlrlng in junction boxes,
panels and bundles.
Prevent mechanical strain or work hardening that would tend to
break the conductors and connections.
Prevent arcing or overheated wiring from causing damage to
mechanical control cables, and associated moving equipment.
f.
 Facilitate reassembly to equipment terminal boards.
9“
h.
Prevent interference between wiring and other equipment.
Provide support for wiring to prevent excessive movement fn
areas of high vlbratlon.
1.
Dress the wiring at connectors and terminating devices In the
direction of the run without deformation of grommet seals.
*
3.11.1 Primary support. Primary support of wiring shall be provtded by
metal cushion clamps and plastic clamps, in accordance with HIL-S-23190,
PlS21919 and !!S2528~, spaced at Intervals not to exceed 24 Inches. In
addition, where wlr~ng Is routed through cutouts in any aircraft structure,
clamps shall be installed as necessary to meet the protection and anti-chafing
requirements of this specification.
 Open wiring contained in troughs, ducts
or conduits is exempt from this requirement.
 Rigid portions of harnesses
shall be supported by clamps spaced at Intervals not to exceed 42 inches.
Clamps for harnesses other than round shall be shaped to fit the contour of
the harness and shall provide a snug fit. Plastic clamps shall not be used to
support r!gld portions of harnesses.
 Plastic cable straps shall not be used
as primary supporting devices unless specifically approved by the procuring
activity and then they shall be subject to the restrictions invoked on plastic
clamps. The primary support of wiring shall not be attached to adjacent
wiring.
20
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-l&5088L
●
3.11 .1.1 Plastic clamps. Plastlc cable cjamps may be used on horizontal
wiring runs provided every fourth clamp is a rubber cushion type. The first
clamp-immediately adjacent to wiring terminations for wire bundles greater
than .125-inch diameter shall be a metal cushion clamp. The use of plastic
cable clamps on other than horizontal wiring runs shall be avoided unless the
installation is such that slack cannot accumulate between clamping points, and
then every fourth clamp shall be a rubber cushion type.
3.11.’ .2 Clamp size. Primary supporting devices shall be of a size
which will hold the wirtng In place without damaging the insu?atlon.
 Tape <n
accordance with 3.11 .6,1 may be wrapped around groups In order to provide a
proper fit
3.11.’ .3 Support at connectors.
 Idlrlng terminating In plugs shall be
supported to dress the wiring in the direction of the run. This may be
accomplished by adapters, clamps, potting, wire guides, or other means
acceptable to the procuring activity.
●
 3.11 .1.4 Metal cushion clamps.
 bihen metal cushion clamps are used for
primary support, their physical properties must be compatible with their
installation environment.
 Cushion compounds are formulated to meet specific
requirements and may not be suitable In other applications.
●
3.11.2 Secondary support. Secondary support of wlrlng harnesses,
bundles or groups (support between primary supports) shall be provided by
devices selected from 3.11.2.1 through 3.11.2.4.
3.11 .2.1
 Tying tape in accordance
 with MIL-T-43435.
3.11 .2.2 Plastic cable straps In accordance
 with MXL-S-23190,
 installed
with tools in accordance with MS90387.
3.11 .2.3
 Insulation
 tape in accordance with MIL-I-23594,
 Type I.
●
 3.11 .2.4
 Protective
 outer covering for a protected harness (see 6.3).
3.11.3
 Limltattons on support.
3.11 .3.1 Continuous laclng shall not be used,
 except In panels and
junction boxes where this practice is optional.
3.11 .3.2
 Deleted.
3.11 .3.3 The use of insulating sleeving for the protection of wiring
shall be kept to a minimum.
 Provisions shall be included to eliminate the
possibility of entrapment of liquids.
3.11 .3.4
 Deleted.
3.11 .3.5 Wires shall not be tied or fastened
 together in conduit or
Insulating sleeving.
21
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MXL-W-5088L
3.11 .3.6 Cable supports shall not restrict the wlrlng in such manner as
to interfere with operation of shock mounts.
3.11 .3.7
 Tape or cord shall not be used for primary support.
3.11 .3.8 Plastic cable straps shall not be used \n areas when the
restrictions of 3.11 .3.8.1 through 3.11 .3.8.7 apply.
3.11 .3.8.1
 Where the
 total
 temperature
 (ambient plus rise) exceeds 85°C
(185*F).
3.11 .3.8.2 Hhere failure of the strap would permit movement of the
wiring against parts which could damage the insulation or allow wiring to foul
mechanical linkages.
3.11 .3.8.3 Hhere failure would permit the strap to fall into moving
mechanical parts.
3.11 .3.8,4
 In h~gh vibration areas.
3.11 .3.8.5 In areas of severe wind and moisture problems (SWAMP), such
as wheel wells, near wing flags, wing folds, umblllcal or other areas
specified in the detail specification or contract.
3.11 .3.8.6 Where exposure to ultra-violet
 Ilght might exist, unless the
straps are resistant to such exposure.
3. 11.3.8.7
 To tie wires, cables, groups or harnesses wlthln bundles.
●
 3.11.4 Anti-chafing provisions.
 Chafing shall be prevented by routing
and clamping bundles to prevent contact with edges of equipment and
structure. Hhere physical separation of at least .375 inch cannot be main-
tained, the edges shall be covered with suitable, protection strips or
grommets. Grommets and protection
 strips shall be securely fastened In place
with bonding or other suitable means. Metal braided or shielded harnesses
shall have a protective external non-metallic covering except for fire zone
areas where it Is an opt~on.
3.11.5 RF coaxial cable support. Support of individual coaxial cables
and of bundles containing coaxial cables shall be subject to the following
additional requirements.
a.
b.
c.
8oth primary and secondary support devices shall be tnstal led
so as not to exert greater pressure on the cable than the
minimum required to prevent sl~pping.
Pressure shall be evenly distributed around bundles containing
coaxial cables, or around the coaxial cable If individually
supported.
The support devices shall not deform the cables so that the
electrical characteristics of the cables are degraded,
22
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
d.
Only tape as specified In 3.11 .2.1 shall be used for tying
bundles containing coaxial cables. Selection of the tape and
installation shall meet the requirements of 3.11.5a, b and c,
except that plastic straps In accordance w~th MIL-S-23190
installed with tools in accordance with MS90387 may be used for
tying bundles containing coaxial cables with solid dielec-
trics. The tension adjustment on the MS90387 tool shall be set
so that the requirement of 3.ll,5a is met.
3.11.6 General purpose ‘protectIon and suppo rt hardware.
 The followlng
items may be used for the protection and support of wiring and related equip-
ment.
3.11 .6.’ Insulation tape.
 Insulation tape shall be of a type su!table
for the a~plication, or as called out for the spec~fic use. Insulation tape
shall be used primarily as a filler under clamps and as secondary support.
Nonadhesive tape may be used as a wraparound wiring for additional protection,
such as in wheel wells. All tape shall have the ends tied or otherwise
suitably secured to prevent unwinding.
 Tape used for protection shall be
applted so that overlapping layers shed liquids, and shall be provided with
drafnage holes at all trap points, and at each low point between clamps.
Plastic tapes that absorb moisture, or that have volattle plasticizers that
produce chemical reactions with other wiring shall not be used.
-.
3.11 .6.2 Insulation sleevinq.
 Unless preinsulated, splices and wire
terminals shall be protected with insulating sleevtng.
 Insulating sleev~ng
shall conform to MIL-I-7444, NIL-I-631 or MIL-I-3190.
 The sleeving shall
cover the splices or terminal barrels and at least .500 inch of the adjacent
wire insulation.
 Non-heat shrinkable sleeving shall be tied in place
securely:
 Sleeving temperature ratings shall be compatible with the tempera-
ture service requirements of the wire and splices or terminals.
3.11 .6.2.1 Insulating sleeving, heat shrinkable.
 Heat shrinkable
insulating sleeving shall conform to MIL-I-23053.
3.11 .6.3 Terminal nipples.
 MS25171 terminal nipples shall be used to
provide overall insulation and protection on terminal lugs and studs.
3.11 .6.4 Grommets.
 Grommets shall be In accordance with MS21266 or
MS35489. MS21266 gronnnets shall be permanently bonded in place and shall
prevent the wires from contacting the sides of the holes.
3.11 .6.4.1 Split grommets.
 The remaining opening In split grommets
shall be no wtder than .063 Inch. The splits shall be diagonal and placed in
the cutouts In such a manner that the wire pressure will be on the opposite
side from the spl~t.
●
 3.11.7
 Radius of bend measured to Inside surface.
a.
Wire, cable and harness.
 For wiring groups, bundles or
harnesses and single wires and cables individually routed and
supported, the rnlnlfnumbend radius shall be ten times the out-
side diameter of the largest included wire or cable. At the
23
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
141L-bi-5088L
b.
c.
d.
point where wiring breaks out from a group, harness or bundle,
the minimum bend radius shall be ten times the diameter of the
largest Included wire or cable, provided the wtrlng is suitably
supported at the breakout point.
 If wires used as shield
terminators or jumpers are required to reverse direction In a
harness, the minimum bend radius of the wire shall be three
times the diameter at the point of reversal providing the wire
Is adequately supported.
-
Protected harnesses.
 The minimum bend radius, as measured on
the Inside radius of a protected harness, shall be six times
its outer diameter.
 In no case shall the bend radius of a
protected harness be less than ten times the diameter of the
largest Included wire or cable.
Coaxial cables.
 The m!nimum radius of bend shall not adversely
affect the characteristics of the cable. For flexlble type
coaxial cables, the radius of bend shall not be less than s~x
times the outsjde diameter.
 For semt-rigid types, the radius
shall not be less than ten times the outside diameter.
These requirements
 also apply during shipping, handling and
storage.
3.11.8 Drip Iooe. Where wtring is dressed downward to a connector,
terminal block, panel or junction box, in addition to the requirement of
3.10.7.1, a trap or drip loop shall be provided in the wiring to prevent
fluids or condensate from runnfng into the above devices. Potted connectors
are exempt from this requirement.
3.11.9 Hiring near moving parts. Hiring attached to assemblies where
relative movement occurs (such as at hinges and rotating pieces, particularly
control sttcks, control wheels and columns, and flight control surfaces) shall
be installed or protected in such manner as to prevent deterioration of the
wirfng by the relative movement of the assembly parts. This deter!orat!on
includes abrasion of one wire or cable upon another and excess twist!ng and
bending. Bundles shall be installed to twist !nstead of bending across
hinges. Cables in the vlcinlty of line replaceable units (LRUS) and weapon
replaceable assemblies (WAS) shall be protected against damage caused by
flexing, pulling, abrasion and other effects of frequent reuwal and replace-
ment of equipment.
3.11.10 Special protection.
 Power feeders, Including wires, cables and
busses shall be given particular mechanical protection such as in the formof
extra Insulation, standoff mounting and separation.
 Bus centers shall be
located wlthln insulated enclosures, isolated in order to prevent a fault to
ground or phase-to-phase fault that would d!srupt the electrical power
system. i41rlng installed in locatlons, such as bilges and on decks or floors,
shall be so located or protected that they will not be damaged by maintenance
personnel during normal maintenance or crew movement.
 Hiring installed In
locations where fluids may be trapped and the wires and cables contaminated,
shall be properly routed and protected against fluld damage.
24
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
3.11.11 Gas and fluid carrying l~nes and tubes. kJiring shall be
suDoorted lndeDendent of and with the maximum practicable separation from all
flu’id-carrying”lines, tubes and equipment.
 Wiring shall be routed above,
rather than below l!quid carrying lines,
 tubes and equipment to prevent
contamination or saturation of the wiring in the event of leakage. 14here this
routing is not practicable, the wiring shall pass below the lines at an angle
rather than parallel to the lines, Terminating devices shall not be placed
under any lines. Wiring shall not be attached to fluld carrying llnes, tubes
and equipment unless they require electrical connections or their separation
is less than two inches, In areas where separation is less than two Inches,
the wiring shall be Installed tomaintatn
 positive separation of at least
.500 inch. Examples: (a) separate the wir~ng from the ltne with a suitable
separation device, (b) attach the wiring to primary support(s) at the closest
proxlmlty of the wiring to the line. ldhere lines and wirtng are installed
such that they are separated by rigid nonmetallic conduit, metal conduit,
ribs, webs, frames, channels, extrusions, stringers, or other suitable
barriers, the above minimum separation requirements do not apply.
3.11.12 Hiring through fuel tanks. Wiring should not be routed through
fuel tanks exceDt where there is no alternative.
 Hiring that must be routed
through fuel tanks, but that is not part of the fuel ma~agement or control
wiring shall be routed through a dry access channel or passage so as to
preclude contact of the wiring insulation and the fuel. The channel or
passage shall be of a size to facilitate the removal and repair of the wiring
without removal of the fuel tank, and shall have a fluorocarbon liner which
will preclude electrical contact.
3.11.13 Miring inside fuel tanks. Hiring that is essentfal to the
operation of fuel management or control system, may be routed inside fuel
tanks only if there is no alternative.
 Hiring that is Lsed In cirh!ts that
are capable of generating energy levels greater than 0.02 millijoules must be
encased in a grounded metal conduit having a fluorocarbon liner. Hiring that
comes in contact with fuel must have an insulation system which is compatible
with the fuel and fuel vapor. Clamps and hardware used to attach wlrlng
inside fuel tanks must also be compatible with the fuel and fuel vapor. Tie
tape, string, mechanical straps, or other items that could become loose and
clog fuel filters shall not be used Inside fuel tanks.
3.11.14 GFAE equipment wirinq.
 GFAE equipments furnished with wiring
and connectors which are excessive {n length shall not have the wiring length
reduced.
 The excess .length shall be grouped and supported in a manner which
will prevent damage to the wlrlng and possible fouling of moving parts.
3.12 Ground return. The electrical power source ground terminals shall
be connected to the primary metallic structure of the vehicle. The vehicle
structure shall serve as the ground return circuit unless system considera-
tions require separate ground return wiring.
 Equipment that incorporates a
ground terminal shall be grounded by the shortest suitable ground wire.
Equipment that is Internally grounded and that does not Incorporate a ground
terminal shall be grounded by the shortest practicable ground wire if suitable
grounding is not provided by the equipment mounts, or if corrosion
 of the
nmunts Is likely to occur. Ground return wiring shall not be connected to
magnesium.
 Bonding shall be in accordance with MIL-B-5087.
25
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-N-5088L
3.12.1 Shielded wire qroundlng.
 Unless otherwise speclfled by the
detail installat~on sDecificatlon for the equipment Involved, shielded wires
shall have the shields adequately grounded at each end. In clrcultsoperatlng
below 50 Ktiz, shielded wires may have the shields grounded at one end only.
In harness appl~cations, shtelds shall be terminated as close as practicable
to the connectors, and specifically wlth~n the booted areas of breakout
terminations.
 Shields grounded through connector accessories shall be
grounded only to connector accessories specifically designed for shield
terminations.
-
3.12.1.1 Shteld terndnations.
 MIL-S-83519 specifies the only devices to
be used in terminating shields.
●
 3.12.2 kiultlple grounds.
 No more than four ground wires shall be
connected to a common ground stud. Ground module In accordance with
MIL-T-81714 may be used for multiple grounds. No more than 16 ground w~res
shall be connected In a ground module.
 Each ground for electrlc power sources
(primary, secondary, conversion, emergency) shall be connected to separate
ground pojnts. Grounds for utilization equipment may be connected to a common
ground point only when supplled from the same power source provided these
equipments do not perform duplicate or overlapping functions.
3.12.3 Insulated equipment boxes. Electrical equipment such as relays
mounted on insulated surfaces shall be Indlvldually connected to ground rather
than serfes connected and then grounded by a single wire to a ground stud.
3.13 Conduit. Conduit may be used where necessary to protect wiring or
to facilitate maintenance ~n inaccessible areas. Use of conduit requ~res
procuring activity approval unless speciftcal?y required elsewhere in this
specification. Metalllc conduit may be used for shleldlng to meet the
requirements of MIL-E-60S1, subject to approval by the procuring activity.
3.13.1 Riqld metal llc.
 Rigid metallic conduit shall be aluminumor
aluminum alloy tubing.
3.13.2 Flexlble metallic.
 Flexible metallic conduit shall conform to
HIL-C-6136 and shall be used only when rigid metalllc conduit Is tmpractlcal.
3.13.3 ?40nmetalllc. !lonmeta?llc condu!t shall be of a material satis-
factory for the Installation environment.
 Polyvlnyl chloride shall not be
used.
3.13.4 ~.
 In determining the diameter of conduit to be used, the
wiring which is to be Installed theretn shall be bundled together and the
maximum diameter measured.
 The maximum diameter shall not exceed 80 percent
of the Internal diameter of the conduit.
 Maximum diameter wire and cable
permitted by applicable speclf~cations shall be used or allowed when taking
this measurement.
3.13.5 Fittings. Conduit fittings in accordance with AND1038O or other
applicable drawings shall be used In conjunction with metallic conduit.
 Non-
metallic conduit shall be term~nated with approved AN or MS fittings.
 Rigid
metallic and nonmetallic conduit used for wiring inaccessible areas need not
be terminated provided the conduit is suitably flared or rounded and sharp
edges removed.
26
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-i&5088L
3.13.6 Conduit installation.
 Conduit shall be installed to withstand
vibration and normal service abuse.
3.13.7 Suppor~.
 Conduit shall be supported so that strain on the
ferrules is relieved.
3.13.8 Drainaqe.
 Where practicable, metallic and nonmetallic conduit
shall be installed so that fluids or condensate will not be trapped. Suitable
drainage holes shall be provided at the low points, except for magneto ground
cable conduit and metallic flexible conduit.
 Tape (nonadhesive) used as a
wraparound wiring shall also have drainage holes at the low points. Burrs
shall be removed from drainage holes In metallic conduit and from the conduit
fittings.
3.13.9 Groundinq.
 Grounding of metallic conduit shall be in
accordance with MIL-B-5087.
3.13.10 Ignition conduit. The gnition ground conduit for each engine
shall be separately routed to prevent a single damage from affecting more than
one engine.
●
 3.?3.11 Radius of bends. The radius of bend of conduit shall allow the
bend radius reau!rements of 3.11.7 to be met. Conduit and conduit fittinq
bends shall not cause chafing of the wiring.
-.
●
 3.14 Connectors.
 Selection and use of electrical connectors and
associated hardware shall be in accordance with MIL-STD-1353.
 Connectors
shall be environment resisting.
 Except for hermetic connectors with only pin
type design, connectors shall be selected so that contacts on the “live” or
“hot” side of the connection are socket type rather than pin type to minimize
personnel hazard and to prevent accidental shorting of live clrcutts when the
connector is unmated.
 When using special contacts such as thermocouple or
coaxtal, circular electrical connectors shall be specified on installation
drawings using the A and B suffix when applicable in the connector part
number. The “A” designation
 without pins and the “B” designation without
sockets, lnd~cate special applications for the connector.
●
3.14.1 Moistureproof connectors.
 Connectors shall be sealed against the
ingress of water and water vapor under all service conditions including
changes in altitude, humidity and temperature.
 The connectors shall have an
interracial seal as well as seallng at wire ends. Environment resisting
connectors having wire sealing grommets are preferred; however, potting may be
used where a grommet seal connector would not be suitable (see 3.14.8).
 The
outside diameter of the wiring terminated at the connector that has a wire
sealing grommet shall comply with the wire diameter range specified for that
connector (see 3.8.6).
3.14.2 Contacts.
 Connectors using removable crimp contacts are
preferred to solder contact types. Contacts shall be in accordance with
MIL-C-39029.
 Contractors may use automatic, semi-automatic or hand crimp
tools for production, provided contacts will give specified performance in
accordance with MIL-C-22520, when crimped with the applicable tool.
21
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-h&5088L
3.14.3 Fireproof and flrewall connectors.
 These connectors shall be
thread-coupled. self-lockinq connectors with crimp contacts
 and corrosion-
resistant steel shells.
 Hh~re It is necessary to”maintain electrical
continuity for a limited time under continuous flame, both the receptacle and
mating plug shall be fireproof.
 If only flame integrity Is necessal y without
the need for electrical continuity, only the receptacle needs to be fire-
proof. Ftreproof and firewall connectors shall meet the Class K, K“ or KS
requirements of the applicable military specification.
-
●
3.14.4 coaxial and trlaxial connectors.
 Coaxial and trlaxlal ‘connectors
shall be suitable for the application and shall be covered by milltary spec-
ification. MIL-STD-1353 shall be used as a selectlon guide. Series N, C,
BNC, TNS, SC, SMA, SMB and SMC shall be in accordance with MIL-C-39012.
Category B connectors of this spectftcation shall be used only on original
equipment. When using Category B connectors, the contractor shall specify an
equivalent field replaceable connector as defined on the latest issue of
MIL-C-39012 for replacement as a maintenance or repair item. Category B
connectors are not recommended for maintenance or repair. Category E and F
connectors of this specification shall be used for applications using
semi-rigid coaxial cables.
 Pulse series connectors shall be in accordance
with MIL-C-3607, HN series with MIL-C-3643, LC series with MIL-C-3650, twin
series with MIL-C-3655, environment resisting series with MXL-C-25516, strip
llne with MIL-C-83517, adapters with MIL-A-55339, and triaxial connectors with
MIL-C-49142. Where connector parameters beyond the scope of the military
specification are required, nonstandard commercial types may be utiltzed
provlcled that they meet the general requirements of the applicable milltary
speclficat!on and are approved by the procuring activity.
3.14.4.1 Coaxial rlqid lines. Coaxial rigid lines that employ air
dielectric shall be provided with air passage bulkhead connectors and pressure
fittfng connectors for purging and pressurization of the llnes.
A
3.14.5 Connector installation. Connectors shall be used to join cables
to cables or to equtpment when frequent disconnection is required to remove or
service equipment: c~onents
 or wtring. Adequate space shall be provtded for
mating and unmating connectors without the use of tools. At least 314 inch
shall be provided around the coupling rings of circular connectors.
 Ctrcular
connectors, when installed with the axis in a horizontal direction, shall be
posittoned so that the master keyway is located at the top. 14hen Installed
with the axis In a vertical direction and master keyway shall be located
forward in relatlon to the vehicle. Connectors shall be located and Installed
so that they will not provide hand holds or foot rests to operattng and main-
tenance personnel, or be damaged by cargo and stored material.
 Both plug and
receptacle shall be visible for engagement and orientation of polarizing
key(s). Mated plugs shall not be strained by the attached wiring. Connectors
in pressurized structures shall preferably be installed with the flange on the
high pressure side. All circular receptacles with mounting holes shall be
installed with mounting screws In each hole. Ground power receptacles shall
be installed with the small contacts at the bottom (6 o’clock position).
●
 3.14.5.1 In-llne connector installation.
 Except for coaxial and data
bus connectors, in-line connectors shall be Installed using primary support
(see 3.11.1 and 6.3.13).
28
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
●
3.14.6 Locatfons with multiple connectors.
 Connectors used to provide
separation of or connections to multiple electric circuits in the same
Io&atlon shall be installed so that it will be impossible to mate the wrong
connector In another mating unit. It is preferred that wiring be routed and
supported such that an improper connection cannot be made. The order of
precedence for making the connector selection for a multiple connector
location shall be as follows:
a.
First, the connectors shall be different sizes or have
different insert arrangements.
b.
Second, the connectors with the same insert arrangements
 shal
have alternate insert posit’ ons or keying positions.
c.
Third, if none of the above requirements can be met, identlca
connectors shall have color coded sleeves attached to the
wiring near the connector which identifies the associated
connector mating half.
 In cases where one of the connectors is
mounted, the connector shall be coded by a color identifier on
the adjacent structure.
3. 14.6.1 Connector drainaqe. Receptacles shall be so positioned that
when unmated for maintenance operations, fluids and condensate will drain out
of and not into the receptacle.
 Connectors installed external to the vehicle
proper, such as In engine compartments, wheel wells, etc., shall be given
special attention to protect against entry of 011 and moisture into the
connector such as taping or sealing mated connectors and providing protective
covers for receptacles and plugs which may be left unmated. Connectors shall
not be mounted or located in a position where they will support standing water.
3.14.7 Safety wlrinq.
 Non-self-locking threaded coupled connectors
located in engine nacelles, areas of high vibration (excludtng connectors on
shock-mounted equipment), and in areas which are normally inaccessible for
periodic maintenance Inspection, shall have the coupling nut safety-wired or
otherwise mechanically locked to prevent opening of the connector due to
vibration. When safety wiring Is required on electrical connectors or
connector accessories which use threaded coupling rings, or on plugs which
employ screws or rtngs to fasten the individual parts of the plug together,
they shall be safety-wired with 0.020 Inch diameter corrosion-resistant steel
wire in accordance with MS33540.
3.14.8 Pottinq. Connectors that require potting shall be potted with
MIL-S-8516 sealant for operating temperatures not exceeding 93°C (200”F).
bihere operating temperatures exceed 93°C but do not exceed 232°C (450”F),
sealing compound in accordance with MIL-S-23586 may be used. Hhere resistance
to oil and fuel is required and temperatures do not exceed 125°C (275”F),
k!IL-M-24041 molding and potting compound may be used. For higher tempera-
tures, potting shall not be used unless specifically approved by the procuring
activity.
 If protective sleeving, identification sleeves, jacketing or
braiding is terminated at a potted connector, it shall not extend into the
potted material.
 Insulated sleeving shall not be used within the potted
material of the connector.
 For Air Force procurement, all p0ttin9 Of
connectors Is discouraged and requires specific application approval.
29
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-k&50881.
3.14.9 Spare contacts.
 i4hen crimp contact connectors are used, the
unused contacts shall be installed.
 MS27488 or applicable sealing plugs shall
be inserted in unused grommet holes of environment resistant connectors. For
potted connectors, each spare contact shall have a p~gtall attached,
consisting of a wire or the largest size that can be accommodated by the
contact and extends 5 to 7 inches beyond the potting material.
 The plgtalls
shall be Identified and dead ended.
-
3.14.10 Solder type contacts.
 The soldering of contacts shall be in
accordance with MIL-STD-454, Requirement 5. When a brazing process is used,
it shall be in accordance with MIL-13-7883.
3.14.11 Dust protection.
 Through production (except when uncovered for
assembly operat~ons) unmated connectors shall be suitably covered. Plastic
dust caps such as those conforming to MS90376, NAS813 and NAS820 may be used
for this purpose.
3. 14.11.1 Final assembly covers.
 Unmated connectors on final installed
assembles.
 such as those intended for test. future or optional wlrin9 shall
be engaged’to approved vapor-tight covers such as dummy receptacles o; chained
protective covers In accordance with MIL-STD-1353.
3.14.12 DUMMY receptacles.
 Dummy receptacles shall be provided with
stowlnq unmated plugs or caps or protective covers when the related connectors
are no~ in operatioiial use.. The dummy receptacle shall be conspicuously
marked and conveniently located to accmdate
 the unmated connector or
protective cover. The dummy receptacle shall conform to the requ~rements of
the related connector specification.
3.14.13
 Provision pluqs. Connector plugs that are for equipment to be
Installed later or for test purposes shall be secured by clamps, or to dummy
receptacles provided for that purpose, in order that the plugs cannot swing on
wir~ng and cause damage to themselves, wlrlng, or adjacent equipment, or foul
mechanical linkage.
●
 3.14.14 Connector accessories.
 Circular electrical connectors shall be
t)rovided with strafn relief accessories In accordance with MIL-C-85049.
Accessories shall not be used to terminate ground wires or shields unless the
accessory was spec~fically desfgned to terminate ground wires or shields.
Ground wires shall not be terminated to saddle clamp screws.
3.15
 Deleted.
3.15.1
 Deleted.
3.16
 Deleted.
3.17 Junct!ons.
 An uninterrupted wire is generally preferable to a
junction. Only approved devices, such as permanent splices, feed-thru
 .
bushings, headers, terminal blocks, terminal junction systems and connectors,
shall be used for wire junctions.
 The need and choice of junctions shall be
determined by consideration of reliability factors, maintenance factors and
manufacturing procedures, in that order of selection.
 Solderless junctions
are preferred.
 The use of solder junctions shall be kept to a minimum.
30
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-kl-5088L
3.17.1 Junction installations.
 Electrical junctions shall be installed
so that they are adequate both mechanically and electrically.
 They shall not
be subject to mechanical strain or used to support Insulating mater~als,
except for insulation on terminals and splices. Junctions shall not depend
upon insulators under compression for maintaining the connection tightness.
Circuit continuity shall not depend upon nonmetallic parts retaining original
shape when subjected
 to compression loading.
●
 3.17.2 Preparation for crimp termination.
 Mires and cables, when
stripped for termination, shall not have more nicked or broken strands than
specified in table II.
 14hen the stripped portion of the conductor Is vls~ble
In the crimp contact inspection hole, no more than .031 ~nch of the conductor
shall be exposed at the end of the barrel for size 12 Affi and smaller,
.063 inch for size 10 and larger, when the conductor Is terminated.
 These
dimensions shall be applicable for contacts, term~nal lugs and spllces. For
terminal lugs, the stripped portion of the conductor shall extend to a point
beyond the open end of the crimp barrel, which will not Interfere with the
stud, washer, nut or similar attachment device. For spllces, the stripped
portion of the conductor shall be visible In the Inspection window.
3.17.3 Conductivity.
 The conductivity of each junction shall not be
less than that of an equivalent length of wire equal in size to that being
joined.
3.17.4 Spac~ng and creepage distance.
 Electrical junctions shall have
adequate spacing and creepage distance to prevent arcing and detrimental
leakage currents between circuits.
 Suitable insulating barrier material may
be used to provide necessary creepage distance.
3.17.5 Protection.
 Special attention shall be given to ensure that
electrical junctions are adequately protected from damage or short circuits
resulting from nravement of personnel, cargo, shell cases, clips, and other
loose or stored materials.
 This protection may be provided by covering the
junctions, by installing them in junction boxes, by locating them In such
manner that additional protection is not required, or by other means
acceptable to the procuring activity.
3.17.6 Exposed junctions.
 Exposed junctions and buses shall be
protected with insulating materials.
 Reusable devices are preferred to non-
reusable material.
 Junctions and buses located within enclosed areas con-
taining only electrical and electronic equipment are not considered as
exposed. Compartments housing electrical and electronic equipment but which
are naturally adaptable as stowage areas or which are not protected against
occasional debris, etc., shall not be considered as enclosed areas. Terminal
junctions located In wheel wells shall be protected against the effects of
water thrown by the wheels.
3.17.7 Essential circuit junctions.
 Junctions in circuits that affect
the operational safety of the vehicle shall be Particularly ~rotected to
ensure a maximum degr~e of reliability.
 These junctions s~all be Individually
encased with insulating material to insure electrical insulation and isolation
from foreign material.
.
31
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
3.17.8 Aluminum wire junc[ ions. Specia attention shall be given to
alum num wire and cable installation to guard against conditions that would
resu t in excessive voltage drop and high res stance at junctions that may
ultimately lead to failure of the junction. Examples of-such conditions are
improper installation of terminals-and washers, improper torsion (“torquing”)
of nuts, and inadequate terminal contact areas.
3.i7.9 Accessibility.
 All junctions shall be accessible for inspection
and maintenance without r~qulrlng electrical, hydraulic, or other operational
power for any vehicle system or equipment, This shall Include those junctions
that are installed for manufacturing convenience.
-
3.17.10 Nonmetallic covers. Nonmetallic junction covers, such as fabric
or plastlc, shall maintatn a high dielectric resistance and shall not absorb
or be affected by applicable fluids.
 They shall be Installed In such a manner
that mechanical movements are free from interference, that fasteners are
unable to cause short circuits, and that proper drainage is provided. tlon-
metall~c covers in proximity with high-temperature equipment, such as
resistors, shall be capable of withstanding the maximum temperature
encountered without damage.
3.18 Junctton boxes. Junction boxes may be used to provide special
protection for wire and cable junctions.
3.18.1 Junction box construction.
 Junction boxes may be made of metal
or of nonmetallic material.
 Metallic junction boxes shall have their
interiors coated with an insulating material to minimize the possibility of
grounding faults.
 The inside of all junction boxes shall be white to
facilitate inspection and maintenance.
 Except for vapor tight boxes, drainage
holes shall be provided, allowing drainage of the boxes with the vehicle on
the ground and in fllght, with wings, wheels, and surfaces both folded and
extended, as applicable,
 Metal junction boxes shall be fabricated from a
metal gage size sufficient to provide stiffness and rigidity, to adequately
support multiple attachments without flexlng or deforming under service
conditions, and to provide proper support and alignment for hinged or
removable covers.
3.18.2 H~nqes.
 Nhen electrical or electronic equipment Is nwnted on
junction box covers, such covers shall be hinged in a manner to prevent damage
to cables and equipment when the covers are opened and closed.
3.18.3 Junction boK identificat~on,
 Junction boxes shall be externally
Identified to facilitate correlation of the box with the wiring diagrams.
Vapor tight junction boKeS shall be externally labeled “Vapor-ttght.”
3.18.4 Junction box wiring.
 Hiring In junction boxes shall be
adequately supported at convenient
 intervals to meet the following require-
ments:
a.
 Provide neat and orderly arrangement of wiring.
b.
 Provide ease of inspection and maintenance.
32
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL4J-5088L
c.
 Provide relief of \train on terminals.
d.
 Minimize possibility of faults.
e.
 Prevent vibration from damaging wiring or terminals.
3.19 Nire splices.
 Insulated
 in-line wire splices may be used to
assemble subassemblies, to incorporate changes or to facilitate repairs and
maintenance.
3.19.1 Permanent splices. Permanent splices may be used to assemble
subassemblies, to incorporate changes or to facilitate repairs. Splices for
copper conductors shall be In accordance with MIL-T-7928 or MIL-S-81824.
 For
the Navy, only MIL-S-81824 environment resistant spllces shall be used.
Environment resistant sealed splices shall be used in areas of severe wind and
misture problems (S14AMP), such as wheel wells, near wing flaps, wing folds
and other areas speclfled in the detail speclflcatlon or contract. Spl ices
for alumlnum conductors shall be in accordance with MIL-T-7099 and MS25439.
3.19.2 Quick disconnect splices. Quick disconnect splices designed for
disconnection without the use of tools shall not be used.
3.19.3 Terminal junction disconnect spllces. When splices are used for
in-llne connections of two or more wires, where disconnect is required,
disconnect spllces in accordance with MIL-T-81714/11 and 141L-T-81J14/12 shall
be used. Sealing plugs in accordance with MS27488 shall be Installed in
unused grommet holes.
3.19.4 Splice restrictions.
 Splices are subject to the following
restrictions:
*
a<
b,
c.
d.
e.
There shall not be more than one splice in any one wire segment
between any two connectors or other disconnect points, except
as allowed by e, g and h, below.
Installation of splices in bundles shall not Increase the size
of the bundle so as to prevent the bundle from fitting in its
designated space or cause congestion which will adversely
aff~ct maintenance,
Spl ces shall not be used
 to salvage scrap lengths of wire.
Spl ces shall not be used within 12 inches of a termination
dev
 ce, except for e, below.
Splices may be used within 12 Inches of a termination device
when attaching to the pigtail spare lead of a potted termina-
tion device, or to”splice multiple wires to a single wire, or
to adjust the wire sizes so that they are compatible with the
contact crimp barrel sizes.
..
33
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
f.
~.
h.
The applicatiorl
 of splices
 shall be under design
 control
 and
sha 1 be authorized by engineering drawings.
Splices may be used to repair
 manufactured harnesses
 or
installed
 wiring when approved by engineering.
(For Air Force use) Splices shall not be used on firing or
control circuits associated with ordnance or explosive sub-
systems.
3.19.5 Splice areas. Splfces Installed for assembly of subassemblies
shall be contained In splice areas and identified as such on all applicable
drawings. Splice areas shall be selected so that they are read~lyaccesslble
for maintenance and inspection including spllces contained in the center of
the bundle.
3.20 Terminal luqs. 141re terminal lugs shall be used to connect wiring
to terminal block studs or equipment terminal studs. No more than four
terminal lugs or three terminal lugs and a bus shall be connected to any one
stud (total number of terminal lugs per stud includes a coamxm bus bar joining
adjacent studs. Four terminal lugs plus a common bus bar thus are not
permitted on one stud). 14hen the terminal lugs attached to a stud vary in
diameter, the greatest diameter shall be placed on the bottom and smal?est
diameter on top. Terminal lugs shall be selected with a stud hole diameter
which matches the diameter of the stud. Tightening terminal connections shall
not deform the terminal lugs or the studs. Terminal lugs shall be so
positioned that bending of the terminal lug is not required to remove the
fasten~ng screw or nut, and movement of the terminal lugs will tend to tighten
..
the connection.
3.20.1 Copper terminal luqs. Solderless crimp style copper wire
terminal lugs shall be used. Terminal lugs shall conform to MIL-T-7928.
Spacers or washers are not permitted between the tongues of terminal lugs.
3.20.2 Alum~num terminal luqs. Aluminum terminal lugs conforming to
NIL-T-7099 (MS25435, MS25436, MS25437 and 14S25438) shall be crimped to
aluminum wire only. The tongue of the aluminum termtnal lugs or the total
number of tongues of aluminum terminal lugs when stacked, shall be sandwiched
between two MS25440 flat washers when terminated on terminal studs. Spacers
or washers are not permitted between the tongues of terminal lugs.
3.20.3 Class 2 terminal luqs. Class 2 terminal lugs conforming to
MIL-T-7928 may be used for installation by contractors, provided that in such
installations Class 1 terminal lugs are adequate for replacement without
rework of installation
 or terminal lugs.
 Class 2 terminal lugs shall be the
Insulated type unless the conductor temperature exceeds 105°C, in which case
uninsulated terminal lugs shall be used. Parts lists shall indicate the
appropriate Class 1 terminal lugs to be used for service replacement of any
Class 2 terminal lugs Installed.
3.21 Terminal boards and terminal junction modules.
 Terminal boards or
terminal junction mdules
 shall be used for junctions of wiring requiring
infrequent disconnection or for joining two or more wires to a common point.
34
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
3.21.1 Terminal boards. Terminal boards shall be in accordance with
MS27212 and shall be Installed with 14S18029 covers. Ammeter shunts shall not
be used as terminal boards.
*
3.21.2 Terminal junction modules.
 Terminal junction modules and their
mounting tracks and brackets shall be in accordance with 141L-T-81714.
Terminal board mounting screw insulators shall be installed in accordance with
)4s3373. Sealing plugs In accordance with MS27488 shall be installed in unused
grommet holes.
*
3.21.3 Terminal board and terminal junction system identification.
 Each
MS27212 terminal board shall be assigned an individual Item number, and the
studs for each board shall be assigned consecutive numbers or letters
beglnnlng with 1 or A, to correlate wfth the wiring diagrams.
 For example,
TB75-4 shall designate stud #4 of terminal board 75. Each term!nal junction
track, per NIL-T-81714, shall also be assigned an }ndlvldual TB number. For
example, track #76 would be designated as TB76. Individual terminal junct!on
modules shall be identified by numbers or letters permanently applied to the
individual track as specified in NIL-T-81714.
 The identification of terminal
boards, studs and tracks shall be of a permanent nature affixed to the vehicle
and shall be so located that the information is readable with minimal
disturbance to wiring or equipment.
 Tracks shall be positioned so that the
module Identification reads left to right, or top to bottom.
 Removal of the
board or track shall leave the Identification intact.
—.
3.22
 Deleted.
3.22.1
 Deleted.
●
 3.23 klorkmanshi~. Workmanship shall be In accordance with aerospace
vehicle electrical wiring and equipment installation practices to ensure
safety, proper operation and service life. Details of workmanship shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the procuring activity.
3.23.1 Loose parts. Chips, scraps, excess hardware, tcols or other
unessential material that can cause damage to the electrical system by
shorting terminals, abrading wiring or puncturing insulation, shall not be
left in the vehicle.
4.
 QUALITY ASSURANCE PROVISIONS
4.1 Responsiblllty for inspection.
 Unless otherwise specified In the
contract or purchase order, the contractor Is responsible for the performance
of all ~nspection requirements (examinations and tests) as specified herein.
Except as otherwise specified in the contract or purchase order, the con-
tractor may use his own or any other facilities suitable for the performance
of the inspection requirements specified herein, unless disapproved by the
Government.
 The Government reserves the right to perform any of the inspec-
tions set forth in this specification where such inspections are deemed
necessary to ensure supplies and services conform to prescribed requirements.
35
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
4.2 General.
 The Inspection checks and tests required herein for wiring
installation are classified as quallty conformance inspections.
4.3 Nlrinq mockup. 14hen specified in the contract, the contractor shall
conduct a wiring mockup for inspection by the procuring activity, prior to
delivery of the first vehicle and in time to permit needed changes. On this
mockup, the contractor shall demonstrate typical wiring Installations and
specific wiring practices for which deviations are required. This mockup may
be conducted on a production vehicle.
4.4 Inspection of first vehicle.
 The wiring installation of the first
complete vehicle shall be Inspected at the contractor’s plant by the con-
tractor under supervision of the procuring activity to determine conformance
to the requirements of this specification, and shall be subject to approval by
the procuring act!vlty.
4.5 Changes In wirlnq. Vehicles in which changes have been made in the
wiring shall be inspected at the contractor’s plant by the contractor under
the supervision of the procuring activity to determine compliance with the
requirements of this specification.
4.6 Indlvldual tests. Functional checks shall be conducted by the
contractor on each vehicle to ensure proper continuity of all electrical and
electronic circuits, and proper operation of all electrical and electronic
equipment.
5.
 PACKAGING (not applicable)
6.
 NOTES
● (This section contains Information of a general or explanatory nature that
may be helpful, but is not mandatory. )
6.1 Intended use. The wiring requirements covered by this specification
are Intended for use In the selection and installation of wlrlng and acces-
sories for the interconnection of electr~cal and electronic equipment in aero-
space vehicles.
 The requirements specified herefn are applicable to develop-
ment, prototype, production, rework and modification wiring, on new or
In-service vehicles. All wiring that is completely internal to electrical and
electronic equipment, should be in accordance with the applicable equipment
specifications rather than this specification.
6.2 Orderinq data. Specify the type of identification code in
accordance with Appendix B or C (see 3.9.1). Unless specified otherwise, the
identification code for the Navy shall be “significant” in accordance with
Appendix B. When wlrlng data in accordance with DOD-STD-863 is required by
contract, nonsignificant wire identification in accordance with Appendix C
will be spec~fied by that standard.
6.2.1 Contract data requirements.
 The selected data requirements in
support of this specification will be reflected in a Contract Data Require-
ments List (DD Form 1423) attached to the request for proposal, invitation for
bid, or the contract as appropriate.
36
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
6.3
 Definitions.
6.3.1
 Aircraft.
 An airplane, helicopter or lighter-than-air
 vehicle.
6.3.2 ~.
 A single metallic conductor of solid, stranded or tinsel
construction, designed to carry current in an electric circuit, but not having
a metallic covering, sheath or shield. For the purpose of this specification,
“wire” refers to “insulated electric wire.”
●
 6.3.3 Wire seqment. A length of wire that Is continuous and unbroken
between its two intended points of termination.
 A wire segment that has been
broken and then repaired is still considered to be one wire segment.
6.3.4 Cable.
 Two or more Insulated conductors, solid or stranded,
contained in a common covering, or two or more insulated conductors twisted or
molded together without common covering, or one insulated conductor with a
metallic covering shield or outer conductor.
6.3.5 blirinq. Nit-es, cables, groups, harnesses and bundles, and their
terminations, associated hardware, and support, Installed in the vehicle.
When used as a verb it is the act of fabricating and Installing these items in
the vehicle.
-.
6.3.6 Wlrinq devices. Hiring devices are the accessory parts and
materials which are used in the installation of wiring, such as terminals,
connectors, junction boxes, conduit, clamps, Insulation and supports.
6.3.7 Flammable.
 Capable of bursting Into flame when a spark or open
flame Is passed sufficiently
 near, as with fume% and vapors from hot oils or
volatile combust~ble liquids, and with finely powdered, combustible solids.
6.3.8 Chafing.
 Repeated relative motion between wiring system
components, or between a wiring system component and structure or equipment,
which results In a rubbing action that causes deleterious wear.
●
6.3.9 Grou~. A number of wires and/or cables and their terminations
secured together within the structure
 of a bundle or harness.
 Groups nOr~llY
contain wi~e and/or cable pertaining to a single
 circuit or routed to a s’ngle
Itemof equipment.
●
 6.3.?0 Harness. An assembly of any number of w!res, cables and/or
groups and their terminations which !s designed and fabricated so as to a’ 1 Ow
for installation and removal as a unit. A harness may be an open harness or a
protected harness.
+
6.3. 10.1 Hlqh density harness.
 A protected harness designed to save
weight and space which has a majority of wire types selected from Appendix A,
table A-II.
*
6.3.11
 Bundle.
 Any number of harnesses or branches routed and supported
together along some distance within the aircraft.
37
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
6.3.12 Spot ties. Ties other than secondary support ties used to
separate a number of wires, cables, groups or harnesses within a bundle.
6.3.13 Primary support.
 Support provided for wiring that carries the
weight of the wiring and secures It in the intended position.
-
6.3.14 Severe Wind and Moisture Problem (S14AMP) areas. Areas such as
wheel wells, wing folds and areas near wing flaps, and areas directly exposed
to extended weather conditions are considered SWAMP areas on aerospace
vehicles.
h
6.3. 5 Open harness.
 An assembly
 of wires
 and/or cables that does not
include a protect~ve outer covering.
●
 6.3. 6 Protected harness.
 A harness that employs some overall outer
covering o provide additional mechanical protection for the wires and/or
cable contained
 therein.
 The added protection may consist of an overbraid,
tape wrap, conduit or some other form of protection.
d
6.3.17 Branch. A section of harness that divides off and extends to a
point of termination.
●
 The connector containing the coupllng ring or
6.3.18 Connector Pluq.active retention device of the mating pair.
●
 6.3.19 Connector receptacle.
 The connector containing the static
retention device of the mating pair.
6.4 Installation of electrical and electronic equipment.
 The installa-
tion of electrical and electronic equipment Is covered by MIL-E-7080 and
MIL-I-8700, respectively.
-
6.5 Technical manuals.
 Technical Manual NAVAIR 01-lA-505, USAF T.O.
1-1A-14, and Army TM 55-1500-323-24, “Installation Practices for Aircraft
Electric and Electronic 141rlng,” contains useful information and guidance on
aircraft wiring Installation techniques.
 Guidance on fabrication and instal-
lation of R.F. cabling is contained In MIL-HDBK-216.
6.6 Corona prevention related information.
 In order to prevent ioniza-
tion, also referred to as corona, or partial discharges between the outside of
an unsh~elded wire covering and grounded structural elements over which the
wire passes, or between the Insulation and a braided shield, the wire covering
should have adequate “equivalent Insulation thickness” for the conditions of
operation.
 “HIre covering” means any combination of extruded or taped insula-
tions and Insulating
 jackets.
 Ionization
 causing chemical and mechanical
deterioration
 of the cover!ngs, is a source of radio frequency interference,
and produces by-products which can corrode adjacent metallic components.
 For
AC operat!ng voltages
 not exceed~ng 240 volts RMS, any g~ven thickness of
flaw-free insulation is adequate to support this voltage at any pressure or
temperature; thickness is dictated by mechanical requirements,
 For higher AC
voltages the “equivalent insulation thickness” can be found In figure 1.
38
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
Select the appropriate curve for the simultaneous minimum pressure and maximum
temperature of the ambient air to which the wire wI1l be exposed and read the
“equivalent insulation thickness” corresponding to the operating RMS voltage.
In aircraft and space applications due to partial or complete enclosure for
pressurization and due to local heating, the ambient pressures and tempera-
tures in the equipment may not correspond to those at the same altitude
outside of the craft.
 Equipment operating pressures and temperatures should
be used in the determination.
 The “equivalent insulation thickness” is
related to the wire covering and is shown in figure 2 where t~, t2, etc., are
the successive thicknesses and kl, k2, etc., are the respective relative
dielectric constants of these same wire coverings.
 The value determined is
independent of power frequency up to at least several kilo- hertz. The values
of figure 1 and figure 2 are based on the inception voltage (corona starting
voltage).
 In many Instances once ionization has started it does not
extinguish unt~l the applied voltage is lowered to the corona extinction
voltage, which may be as much as 20 percent lower. Thus, a factor of safety
should be allowed so that a transient voltage will not initiate Ionlzatlon
which will not disappear at the operating voltage.
 For DC, cables can be used
without ionization to a maximum voltage of 340 volts independent of the usual
practical range of wire covering thicknesses.
 Under certain conditions
(notably at high ambient temperatures and/or high altitude) some wire types
may not be free from corona at rated voltage.
-.
●
 6.7 Nlre current ratings.
 The wire current rating in 3.8.8. 1.1 is based
upon the curves of figures 3, 4 and 5. The following examples illustrate the
procedure for using these curves for applications other than 70°C and 33 wire
harness for size 26 through 10 gauge, and 9 wire harness for size 8 and larger
as referenced for table I values.
*
1.
Assume a harness (open or protected) consisting of 10 size 20,
200”C rated wires and 25 size 22, 200°C rated wires.
 It will
be installed in an area where the ambient temperature Is 60”C
and the vehicle is capable of operating at 60,000 feet
altitude.
 Circuit analysis reveals that 7 of the 35 wires in
the bundle (7/35 - 20 percent) will be carrying power currents.
a.
Referring to the “single copper wire in free air” curves
in figure 3, determine the
 T of the wire to determine
free air ratings (for aluminum, derate these values by 20
percent).
 Since the wire will be In an ambient of 60*C
and the wire is rated at 200”C, the
 T iS 200-60 =
140”C. Following the 140”C
 T line on figure 3, the
free air rating of size 20 is 21.5 amps and the free air
rating of size 22 is 16.2 amps.
b.
Referring to the “bundle derating curves” in figure 4, the
20 percent curve is selected since circuit analysis
indicated that 20 percent or less of the wire in the
harness would be carrying power currents.
 Find 35 (on the
abscissa) since there are 35 wires in our bundle and
determine a derating factor of .52 (on the ordinate) from
the 20 percent curve.
39
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
c.
Derate the size 22 free air rating of 16.2 amps by .52 to
get 8.4 amps harness rating and the size 20 free air
rating of 21.5 by .52 to get 11.2 amps harness rating,
-
d.
Referring to the “altitude derating curve” of f~gure 5,
look for 60,000 feet (on the abscissa) since that is the
altitude the vehicle wI1l be operating at the note the
wire must be derated by a factor of ,79 (found on the
ordinate).
e.
f)erate the s~ze 22 harness rating of 8.4 amps by .79 to
get 6.6 amps and the size 20 harness rating of 11.2 amps
by .79 to get 8.8 amps.
f.
To find the total harness capacity, multiply the total
number of size 22 wires by the derated capacity (25 x 6.6
= 165.0 amperes) and add to that the number of size 20
wires multiplied by the derated capacity (10 x 8.8 - 88
amperes) and multiply the sum by the 20 percent harness
capacity factor. Thus, the total harness capac!ty is
(165.0 + 88.0) x 20 = 50.6 amperes.
9-
It has been determined that the total harness current
should not exceed 50.6 amps, no size 22 wire should carry
more than 6.6 amps and no size 20 wire should carry nnre
than 8.8 amps.
2.
Assume a harness (open or protected) conslst!ng of 12, size 12,
200”C rated wires. The harness wtll be operated In an ambient
of 25°C at sea level and 60”C at 20,000 feet altitude. All 12
wires wtll be operated at thetr maximum capactty.
--
,
a.
b.
c.
Referring to the “single wire In free air” curve In figure
3, determine the
 T of the wire to determine free alr
ratings. Since the wire will be in an ambient of 25°C and
60”C and is rated at 200”C the
 Ts are 200*C - 25*C-
I75”C and ZOO*C - 60”C = 140°C. Following the 175°C and
the 140”C
 T lines on figure 3, the free air ratings of
size 12 are 68 amps and 61 amps, respectively.
Referring to the “bundle deratlng curves” in figure
 4, the
100 percent curve !s selected because we know all 12 wires
will be carrying full load. Find 12 (on the abscissa)
since there are 12 wires In the bundle and determine a
derating factor of .43 (on the ordinate) from the 100
percent curve.
Derate the size 12 free alr ratings of 68 amps and 61 amps
by .43 to get 29.2 amps and 26.2 amps, respectively.
d.
Referring to the “altitude deratlng curve” of figure 5,
look for sea level and 20,000 feet (on the abscissa) since
these are the conditions at which the load will be
carried. The wire must be derated by a factor of 1.0 and
.91, respectively.
40
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
e.
Derate the size 12 bundle ratings of 29.2 amps at sea
level and 26.6 amps at 20,000 feet by 1.0 and .91,
respectively, to obtain 29.2 amps and 23.8 amps.
f.
The total bundle capacity at sea level and 25°C ambient is
29.2 by 12 = 350.4 amps and at 20,000 feet at 60”C ambient
is 23.8 x 12 = 285.6 amps. Each size 12 wire can carry
29.2 amps at sea level, 25°C amb!ent or 23.8 amps at
20,000 feet, 60”C ambient.
●
 6.8 Thermocouples.
 A thermoelectric clrcult consists of two wires
com~osed of dissimilar metals permanently joined at both ends (thermocouple)
and one thermocouple Is heated”to a diff~r~nt temperature than the other”. The
signal from the heated thermocouple is a function of the temperature gradient
of the thermocouples and the composition of the two metals.
6.9
 Hiring
 d{agrams.
 Hiring diagrams when contractually required on the
DO 1423 shall be prepared
 in accordance with 00D-STD-100, ANSI Y14.15, ANSI
Y32.16 and ANSI Y32.2.
6.9.1 Schematic diagrams (except for Atr Force use). Schematic diagrams
(functional) for electrical wiring shall show each circuit and may be on
multiple sheets.
 The presentation of these circuits in a straight Itne
(elementary) form is acceptable.
 Each electronic wiring diagram of an equip-
ment or system shall be included on one sheet, if practicable.
=.
6.9.2
 Master dlaqrams (except for Air Force use). Master diagrams and
wire data lists shall be \n accordance with MIL-M-81260 and DOD-STD-100.
 Each
system, such as AC power, DC power, exterior llghting and engine control shall
be presented on one sheet, If practicable, without undue crowding.
●
 6.9.2.1 Terminal board and terminal module symbols (except for Air Force
~.
 On the master interconnection diagrams, each terminal board stud symbol
and terminal module contact cavity symbol shall be identified to exactly
correlate w~th that established In 3.21.1. The wiring diagram shall have
complete representation for each terminal board, module-track assembly and
wire connected thereto, Includlng information as to location of the board or
assembly. Terminal boards and module-track assemblies shall be identified In
accordance with the requirements of ANSI Y32.16.
*
6.10 International standardization agreement.
 Certain provisions (3.8,
Appendix A and Appendix B) of this specification are the subject of inter-
national standardization agreement ASCC 104/19, STANAG 3317 and STANAG 3347.
When amendment, revision or cancellation of this specification Is proposed
that will affect or violate the international agreement concerned, the
preparing activity will take appropriate action through international
standardization channels, including departmental standardization offices, to
change the agreement or make other appropriate accommodations.
41
—
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
●
6.11
 Subject term (keyword)
 l~stinq.
Cables
Cables, coaxial
Circuit
Conduit
Connectors
Current
Junction boxes
Terminals
Wire
Hire, aluminum
Hire, copper
Hire, electr~cal
6.12 Changes from previous
 Issue.
 The margins of this specification are
marked with an asterisk to Indicate where changes from the previous issue were
made. This was done as a convenience only and the Government assumes no
liability whatsoever for any Inaccuracies in these notations.
 Bidders and
contractors are cautioned to evaluate the requirements of this document based
on the entire content irrespective of the marginal notations and relationship
to the previous issue.
.-
Custodians:
Army - CR
Air Force - 85
Review actlvitles:
Alr Force - 11, 17, 19, 99
User activities:
Army - ME, AV
Preparing activity:
Navy - AS
Project GDRQ-0080
—
42
.-
.-
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
TABLE I.
 Current rating of wires.
Conductor
 Wire
Material
 Size
 105”C
 1So”c
 200°c
Copper or
 8
 38
 57
 71
Copper
 6
 50
 76
Al loy
 4
 68’
 103
 1U
2
 95
 141
 179
1
 113
 166
 210
1/0
 128
 192
 243
2/0
 147
 222
 285
3/0
 172
 262
 335
4/0
 204
 310
 395
Aluminum
 8
 6
 E
 45
 61
4
 54
 82
2
 76
 113
90
 133
1}0
 102
 153
2/0
 117
 178
3/0
 138
 209
4/0
 163
 248
TABLE 11.
 Flaxlmum allowable nicked and broken strands (see 3.17.2).
Conductor
Material
CopperCopper
Alloy
or
Aluminum
Number of Strands
Per Conductor
;;
Above 37
All numbers of strands
Total Allowable Nicked
and Broken Strands
2 nicked, none broken
4 nicked, none broken
6 nicked or broken
None nicked or broken
43
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
I
I
D
u
.
Xx%x%
 000
 0 0
 0
 0
 0
Omm.*
 ::Z
 z
 ~gz:
 ~ s
 ?
 2
 :
CORONA-START
 VOLTAGE
 (VOLTS RMS)
44
I&
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
INSULATION
7HtCKNESSEs
(MtLs)
lRlc CONSTANT
FIGURE 2.
 Equivalent
 insulation thickness of wire covering (see b.6).
45
—
 .—
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
N
 TEMPERATURE
 DIFFERENCE
 (WIRE
 RATING
MINUS
 THE AMBIENT
 = T IN
 C)
46
.
C7
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
.
.
I
L
k
l=)
m
 s
TEMPERATURE
 DIFFERENCE (WIRE RATINC
MINUS
 THE AMBIENT = T IN C)
47
VI
.
m
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
.
?--J
L
o
—
CURRENT
 DERATING
 FACTOR
 FORWIRES
 UNBUNDLES
48
...
--
-.
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
f’
0
0
0
m
o
0
u-l
5?
0
I--I
w
>
L
:r.
.
LD
K-
-r
 +
.kJ.
ad
L.
Wm
v.
a)
.
-gel
+.
.-
 I-4
u.
z.
 ;
m
-.
.(-)
.
IL
CURRENT
 DERATING
 FACTOR
49
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
..
THIS PAGE I NKNTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
..
 ...
 ,
 ,.
f’
,
-
50
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
APPENDIX A
f
OPEN OR PROTECTED HARNESSES
10.
 SCOPE
10.1 scope. TtIis appendix governs the selection of electrtc wire and
cable to be used for the interconnection of equipment tn aerospace vehicles.
This Appendix is a mandatory part of the spectflcatlon.
 The Information
contained herein Is intended for compliance.
20.
 APPLICABLE
 DOCUMENTS
20.1
 Government
 documents.
20.1,1 Specifications, standards and handbooks.
 Unless otherwise
specified, the followlng speclflcatlons, standards and handbooks of the Issue
listed in that issue of- the Department of Defense Index of Spectficatlons and
Standards (0001SS) spec fled in the solicitation form a part of this spec-
Ificatlon to the extent specifled herein.
SPECIFICATIONS
MILITARY
MIL-C-17
 Cable, Radio Frequency, Flexible and Semi-Rig~d,
General Specification for
MIL-N-22759
 Hire, Electric, Fluoropolymer-\nsulated,
 Copper
or Copper Alloy
MIL-N-25038
 Wire, Electrical, High Temperature and Fire
Resistant, General Spec!ftcation For
MIL-C-27500
 Cable, Power, Electrical and Cable Special
Purpose. Electrical Shielded and Unshielded,
General Specification For
MIL-H-81044
 Wire, Electric, Crosslinked Polyalkene, Cross-
linked Alkane-lmlde Polymer or Polyarylene
Insulated, Copper or Copper Alloy
MIL-W-81381
 Hire, Electric, Polyimide-insulated,
 Copper and
Copper Alloy
MIL-T-81490
 Transmission
 Lines, Transverse Electromagnetic
Mode
MIL-C-85485
 Cable, Electric, Filter Line, Radio Frequency
Absorptive
(Unless otherwise Indicated, copies of federal and military specifications,
standards and handbooks are available from the Standardization Documents Order
Desk, Bldg. 4D, 700 Robbins Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111-5094.)
51
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
30.
 REQUIREMENTS
APPENDIX A
/
-
30.1 Selection of wire and cable. Unless otherwise approved by the
procuring activity, only wires and cables conforming to one of the documents
listed In table A-I, table A-II, 30.1:3, 30.1.4, 30.1.5, 30.1.6, of this
Appendix shall be used for interconnection of electric and electronic
equipment in aerospace vehtcles.
 The limitations and other select!on crtterla
of Section 3 of this specification shall also be imposed on the selectlon and
use of these w~res and cables. The contractor shall become familiar with all
requirements of this speclflcatlon before any wires and cables are selected
for use.
30.1.1
 Harness wlrinq.
 Hires shall be selected from table A-I.
h
 30.1.2 Protected harnesses.
 Wires shall be selected from table A-II,
but may also Include wires from table A-I. Any harness that uses Wire
select;d from table A-II shall have an outer cover!ng throughout ~ts length
for mechanical protection.
●
 30.1.3 Use of MIL-H-81381 wire (for Air Force applications only).
MIL-H-81381 wire shall be used only when justified to and approved by the
responsible program management office within the procuring actlvlty.
●
30.1.4 Cable. Cable shall be in accordance with MIL-C-27500.
 Only
constructions utllizlng basic wires In accordance with tables A-I and A-II
shall be used. Shielded unjacketed cables shall not be used.
,.
30.1.5
 Coaxial cable.
 Coaxial cable shall be in accordance
 with
MIL-C-17.
30. 1.5.1 T.E.M. transmission lines. Transverse electromagnetic
 mode
transmission lines shall be In accordance with MIL-T-81490.
30.1.6 Filter Ilne cable.
 Radio absorptive filter llne cable shall be
In accordance with ktIL-C-85485.
40.
 NOTES
40.1 Intended purpose. The purpose of this Appendix Is to present the
contractor with a working llst of approved documents to be used In the
selection of wire and cable for aerospace vehicle wiring.
52
4
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-I+5088L
v
APPENDIX
 A
,/
TABLE A-I.
 Open wlrinq appllcat!ons
 ~/.
Rated
Voltage
 wire
rating
 temper-
 Insulation
 Conductor
Document
 maximum)
 ature (“C)
 Type
 type
 Application
MIL-14-22759/l
 600
 200
 Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 copper
 use in
TFE and TFE
 Army, Navy
coated glass
 and Air Force
applications
MIL-W-22759/2
 600
 260
MIL-H-22759/3
 600
 260
‘“I
600
 200
t--
MIL-H-22759/5
 600
 200
MIL-H-22759/6
 600
 260
Fluoropolymer
insulated
TFE and TFE
coated glass
Nickelcopper
coated
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and hir Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
 Approved for
insulated
 copper
 use In
TFE-glass-
 Army, Navy
TFE
 and Air Force
appllcat!ons
Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
insulated
 copper
 use in
TFE-glass-
 Army, Navy
FEP
 and Alr Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 copper
 use in
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
 Approved for
insulated
 copper
 use !n
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
.
~/
 For sealing capability of wire, see 3.8.6 and 3.14.I
--
53
-.
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
3
APPENDIX A
/
TABLE A-I
 Open wiring applications.
 (Cont.)
w
Rated
Voltage
 wire
rating
 temper-
Document
 maximum)
 ature (“C)
MIL-b&22759/7
 600
 200
MIL-W-22759/8
 600
 260
MIL-H-22759/9
 I000
 200
MIL-W-22759/1(
 1000
 260
MIL-H-22759/1:
 600
 135
MIL-H-22759/1[
 600
 150
Insulation
 Conductor
Type
 Type
 Application
Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
tnsulated
 copper
 use ~n
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 copper
 use In
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 copper
 use in
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
 Approved for
insulated
 copper
 use in
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
appl!cat!ons
Fluoropolymer
Insulated
FEP PVF2
Tin coated
copper
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
F]uoropo]Ymer
insulated-
extruded
ETFE
Tln coated
copper
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
54
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
.—
APPENDIX A
TABLE A-I.
 Open wiring applications .(Cent.)
f’
Rated
I
 Voltage
 rating
 ~ire
 temper-
ature (“C)
150
MIL-W-22759120
 1000
 200
260
T50
MIL-1+22759/35
 600
 200
‘M-F
 200
[nsulation
 Conductor
Application
type
 type
~luoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 high strength
 use in
~xtruded
 copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
ETFE
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
insulated
 high strength
 use in
extruded
 copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
TFE
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 high strength
 use in
extruded
 copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
TFE
applications
fluoropolymel
 Tin coated
insulated
 copper
crossllnked
inodlfled ETF
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Fluorcpolyme
 silver coated
 Approved for
insulated
 high strength
 use in
crossllnked
 copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
modified ETF
applications
Fluoropolyme
 crosslinked
 insulated
 1-
 Nickel copper
 coated
 Approved use Army, and !n
 Air Navy
 Force
 for
applications
.-
55
——
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
APPENDIX
 A
TABLE A-I.
 Open wirinq app licatlons.(Cent.)
J’
T-
 1
 I Rated
 I
 I
 T--7
I
 \
 Uocument
 !41L-ld-22759/42 (maximum)
 Voltage
 rat!ng
 600
 wire
 temper-
 ature 200
 (“C)
 Insulation
 tYPe
 Fluoropolwr
 crosslinked
 Insulated
 Conductor
 type
 Nickel high copper strength
 coated
 alloy
 d
 JS6
 !rmy, In
Navy
and Air Force
I
 I
 I modified ETFEI
 applications
~IL-H-22759/43
 600
 200
MIL-H-2503813
 600
 260
~1
150
MIL-W-81044I6”
 600
MIL-H-81044/7
 600
 150
“MIL-w-81044/9
 600
 150
FluOroDolwer
lnsulated-
crossl inked
modified ETFE
Silvercopper
coated
See
spec!f\catlon
sheet
See
specification
sheet
Crossl inked
polyalkene
Silver coated
high strength
copper alloy
*
Approved for
use in
Army, NavY
and Air Force
appllcatlOnS
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
appl!cat\OnS
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and Alr FOrce
~llcatlon
 L
2/
 For use In circuits where during a fire, maintenance
 of electrical
Integrity is required for a limlted time.
56
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
,
APPENDIX A
;
TABLE A-I.
 Open wiring applications.(Cent. )
Rated
Voltage
 w!re
rating
 temper-
Document
 (maximum)
 ature (“C)
MIL-W-81044/10
 600
 150
MIL-W-81381/11
 600
 200
MIL-W-81381112
 600
 200
MIL-H-81381/13
 600
 200
MIL-bl-81381/14
 600
 200
MIL-K81381/22
 600
 150
L
 i
Insulation
 Conductor
type
 type
 Application
Crossllnked
 Silver coated
 Approved for
polyalkene
 high strength
 for use In
copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Fluorocarbon
 Silver coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
Alr Force: 31
Fluorocarbon
 Nickel coated
 Army: Not for
polylmlde
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 3/
Fluorocarbon
 Silver coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 high strength
 use
copper alloy
 Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 3/
Fluorocarbon
 Nickel coated
 Army: Not for
polylmide
 high strength
 use
copper alloy
 Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 3/
Fluorocarbon
 Tin coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 3J
~/
 MIL-W-81381
 ts allowed In Alr Force applications
 only (See 30.1.3 for restrlctlons).
57
—...—
 —
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-b&5088L
TABLE A-II.
APPENDIX A
/
Protected w!rlng appllcat~ons
 ~1.
-
Rated
Voltage
 wire
rating
 temper-
 Insulation
 Conductor
Document
 (maximum)
 ature (*C)
 type
 type
 Application
HIL-H-22759/11
 600
 200
 Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 copper
 uit in
extruded TFE
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
appl~catlons
MIL-H-22759/12
MIL-W-22759/14
MIL-H-22759/15
600
600
600
260
135
135
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
insulated
 copper
extruded TFE
Fluoropolyme r
 Tln coated
insulated
 copper
FEP-PVF2
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Alr Force
applications
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Fluoropolymer
 Silver plated
 Approved for
insulated
 high strength
 use in
 w
FEP-PVF2
 copper alloy
 Army, Navy
and Alr Force
applications
, MIL-H-22759/18
 600
I
I
~I
I
ML-H-22759115
600
150
150
Fluoropolymer
insulated
extruded
ETFE
Tin coated
copper
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Atr Force
applications
Fluoro~olYmerl
 Silver coated
 Approved for
lnsulated-
 high strength
 use in
extruded
 copper
 .,
 alloy
 Army, Navy
ETFE
 and Air Force
applications
1/
 For sealing capability of wire, sec 1.8.6 and 3.14.1.
.
58
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
APPENDIX A
,f’
..-
 TABLE A-II.
 Protected wlrlng applications.
 (Cont.)
r
 Rated
Voltage
 wire
rating
 temper-
 Insulation
 Conductor
. Document
 maximum;
 atuie (“C)
 type
 type
 Application
PIIL-W-22759/22
 600
 200
 Fluoropolymer
 Silver coated
 Approved for
Insulated
 high strength
 use in
extruded
 copper alloy
 At-my, Navy
TFE
 and Air Force
applications
‘–fiIL-M-22759/23 600
 --1-EET
 TFE
 Nickel h\gh copper strength
 coated
 alloy
 Approved use Army, and Air in
Navy
 Force
 for
applications
41L-H-22759133
‘141L-b4-22759/44‘MIL-1+22759/45
600
600
600
600
150
200
Fluoropolymer
 Tin coated
Insulated
 copper
crossl inked
modlfled ETFE
Silver coated
high strength
copper alloy
crossl inked
modified ETFE
Silvercopper
coated
I
Fluoropolymer
 Nickel coated
!nsulated-
 copper
crossl inked
modified ETFE
1
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
Approved for
use In
Army, Navy
and Alr Force
applications
Approved for
use in
Army, Navy
and Air Force
applications
59
—
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
KIIL-H-5088L
APPENDIX A
 i
#
I
TABLE A-II.
 Protected wiring applications.
 (Cont.)
Voltage
 Rated
rating
 wire
Documents
 max 1mum
 temper-
 Insulation
 Conductor
ature (°C)
 type
 type
 A l~catlon
MIL-H-22759/46
 MIL-W-81044/12
 600
 600
 200
 150
 Fluoropolymer
 insulated
 crosslinked
 modified Crossllnked
 ETFE
 Nickel high copper Tin coated
 strength
 coated
 alloy
 7
 Approved Army, use and applications
 Alr In
 Navy
 Force
 for
polyalkene
 copper
 m
MIL-W-81044/13
 600
 150
 Crossl inked
 Silver coated
polyalkene
 high strength
 Akhy,
 Navy,
copper alloy
 and Air Force
applications
MIL-H-81381/7
 600
 200
 Fluorocarbon
 Silver coated
 Army: Not for
polylmide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
MIL-w-81381/B
 600
 200
MIL-1+81381/9
 600
 200
MIL-H-81381/1(
 600
 200
Fluorocarbon
 Nickel coated
-.
polyimlde
 copper
 Navy: use
 Not use
 for
 I
A!r Force: 2/ I
Fluorocarbon
 Silver coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 high copper strength
 alloy
 Navy: use
 Not use
 for
 I
polylmide
 Fluorocarbon
 high Nickel strength
 coated
 -w-=+-i
 use
copper
 Navy: use
 Not for
 I
Air Force: 2/ [
—
 2/
 MIL4+-81381 Is allowed for use in Air Force applications
 only (See 30.1.3 for
restrictions).
60
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
APPENDIX A
/
TABLE A-II.
 Protected wiring applications.
 (Cont.)
Rated
Voltage
 wire
rating
 temper-
 Insulation
 Conductor
,.Document
 (maximum)
 tYpe
 type
 Appllcat!on
ature (“C)
MIL-H-81381117
 600
 200
 Fluorocarbon
 Silver coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
[
use
Alr Force: 2/
~ MIL-H-81381/la
 600
 200
 Fluorocarbon
 Nickel coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 2/
MIL-W-81381119
 600
 200
 Fluorocarbon
 St]ver coated
 Army: Not fOr
polyimide
 high strength
 use
copper alloy
 Navy: Not for
use
Alr Force: 2/
MIL-H-81381120
 600
 200
 Fluorocarbon
 Nickel coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 high strength
 use
copper alloy
 Navy: Not fOr
use
Air Force: 2/
MIL-W81381/2
 1
 600
 150
 Fluorocarbon
 Tin coated
 Army: Not for
polyimide
 copper
 use
Navy: Not for
use
Air Force: 2/
~/
 NIL-H-81381 \s allowed for use in
 Air Force applications only (See 30.1.3 for
restrictions).
=--
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-50881
APPENDIX A
-
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY
 LEFT BLANK
62
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
APPENDIX B
,,
SIGNIFICANT HIRE IDENTIFICATION
(See 3.9.1)
/
10. SCOPE
10.1 Scope. This appendix establishes the procedure for assigning the
Identiflcatlon codes for each Individual wire and harness within the scope of
this speclflcatlon when the type of identlflcatlon code is specified as
“significant” in accordance with 3.9.1 and 6.2. The w!re identification is
“sign!flcant” in that it Indicates the function of the circuit.
 This
Identlflcation shall be for use in wlrlng data and for physical identification
of Installed wiring.
 This Appendix is a mandatory part of the specification.
The Information contained herein is intended for compliance.
20.
 APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS
20.1
 Government documents.
●
 20.1.1 Specifications, standards and handbooks.
 The followlng
specifications, standards, and handbooks form a part of this document to the
extent specified herein. Unless otherwise specified, the issues of these
documents are those listed in the issue of the Department of Defense Index of
Specifications and Standards (DODISS) and the supplement thereto, cited in the
solicitation.
STANDARDS
MILITARY
MIL-STD-196
 Joint Electronics Type Destgnatlon
 System
(Unless otherwise indicated, copies of federal and military specificat~ons,
standards and handbooks are available from the Standardization Documents Order
Desk, Bldg. 4D, 700 Robblns Avenue, Philadelphia, pA 19~11-5094.)
30.
 REQUIREMENTS
30.1 Assignment responsibility.
 The contractor (installing activity)
shall assign the identification code for circuit functions except those listed
under R, S, T and Y in Table B-I.
 The equipment contractor shall assign the
identification code in accordance with the equipment specification for equip-
ments fall!ng under categories R, S, T and Y.
30.2 Hiring identification code. The wiring identification code shall
be in accordance with the pattern illustrated in Figure B-1 or B-2 as
applicable, and as follows:
30.3 Unit number. Hhere two or more identical Items of equipment are
installed in the same vehicle, the unit numbers “1,” “2,” “3,” “4,” etc.. maY
be prefixed to differentiate between wires when it Is desired that the equip-
ment have the same basic identification.
 To facilitate interchangeability
requirements, identical wiring located in left and right wings, nacelles, and
major Interchangeable structural assemblies may have identical identification
and the unit number is not required.
63
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
I
APPENDIX B
.30.4 Circuit function letter. The circuit function Iette is used to
i_cientifythe circuit function specified In Table B-I. Mhere a L ire Is used
for more than one circuit function, the circuit function letter of thatcircuit
which Is functionally predominant shall apply. hlhen functional predominance
is questionable, the circuit funct~on letter for the wire having the lowest
wire number shall be used.
30.5 Hire number. The wire number consisting of one or more d!gits is
used to differentiate between wires In the circuit.
 A different number shall
be used for wire not having a common terminal or connection.
30.5.1 Wires with the same clrcult function having a common terminal
connection or junction shall have the same wire number but different segment
letters.
.
30.5.2 Numbers 2( 00 to 4999, inclusive, shall be reserved for use by the
procur!ng activity to dentify wires installed by service modifications.
30.5.3 Beginning with the lowest number, a number shall be assigned to
each wire In numerical sequence, as far as practicable.
30.6 Hire segmen
 letter. A wire seament is a conductor between two
terminals or connections. - The wire segmen~ letter is used to differentiate
between conductor segments In a particular circuit.
 A different letter $hal~
be used for wire segments having a cmn
 terminal or connection.
 Hire seg-
ments shall be lettered In alphabetical sequence and the letter “A” should
icientlfy the first segment of each clrcult starting at the power source.
 If a
circuit contains only one wire segment, the wire segment shall be marked “A.”
The letters “I” and “O” shall not be used as segment letters. Double letters
“AA,n “AB,” “AC,” etc., shall be used when more than 24 segments are
required.
 Two permanently spliced wires do not require separate segment
letters if the splice Is used for modlflcatlon or repair.
30.7 Hire size number.
 The wire size number ts used to identify the
size Of the wfre or cable. For coaxial cables and thermocouple wires, the
wire size number shall not be Included.
 For thermocouple wires, a dash (-)
shall be used In lieu of the wire size number.
30.8
 Ground, phase or thermocouple
 letter(s).
30.8.1 Unless otherwise specified by the procuring activity, ground
cable letter “N” shall be used as a suffix to the wire identification code to
Identify any wiring that completes the circuit to the ground network. Such
wlrlng shall be capable of being connected to the ground network of the atr-
craft electrical system without causing malfunctioning of any circuit.
Critical and sensitive electronic systems which have Interconnecting “ground”
leads, but only one segment actually grounded to the structure shall be
identified with the “N” suffix.
30.8.2 Phase letter “A,” “B” or “C” shall be used as a suffix on the
wire Identlflcat!on code to ldent{fy the phase of wires that are in the
three-phase power distribution wtring of AC systems.
 The phase sequence shall
be “A-B-C.” The letters “A,” “B” and “C” shall indicate the phase sequence
corresponding to “T1,” “T2” and “T3,” ~4spectlvely.
 For grounded delta
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
APPENDIX
 B
 $
systems, “T2” shall
 be considered as corresponding to the groun ed phase.
?
(Examples of wire identification coding, as applied to AC powerw iring,
 are
illustrated by Figure B-3.)
30.8.3 Phase letter “V” shall be used as a suffix on the identification
code to identify the ungrounded wire that is in a single-phase system.
30.8.4 For thermocouple wire, the followtng suffixes shall be used as
applicable.
 Where space considerations dictate, the two letter suffixes shown
may be used:
CHROM
 - Chromel
 -
 CR
ALML
 - Alumel
 -
 AL
IRON
 - Iron
 FE
CONST
 - Constantan
 -
 CN
COP
 - Copper
 -
 CU
●
 30.9 Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) identification.
 Hhen EMC
category number identification is used, it shall be accomplished by marking
applicable category number at the end of each significant-wire code. Category
number definition shall be as specifically approved by the procuring activity.
&
 30.9.1 Alternate methods for EMC identification.
 Alternate methods such
as identification sleeving, color codes or other methods may be used for EMC
category identification when approved by procuring activity.
-.
30.10 Aluminum wire.
 For alum~num wire, ALUMINUM or ALUM shall be added
as a suffix to the wire identification code.
30.11 Spare contacts.
 Hires attached to spare contacts of connectors
shall be identified by the contact designation.
30.12 Harnesses.
 Each harness shall be identified by the letter “W” and
a distinct suffix. Example:
 H-1, W-2, W-3, H-4, etc.
30.13 Code for type designated equipment.
 For equipment type designated
in accordance with MIL-STD-?96, the wire identification code shall be derived
utilizing that portion of the rnllitary type designation (AN nomenclature)
following the /, but excludlng the hyphen and any suffix letters.
 The block
of wire numbers for each equipment shall start wtth 1 and continue for as many
numbers as are needed to Identify all wires.
 For example, wires of an
AN/APS-45 would be identified APS45-1A20 --- APS45-975C22; wires of the
AN/ARC-52A would be ARC52-1A22 --- ARC52-999C22; and the 14X94 would be the
MX94-IA20 --- MX94-62D20.
65
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-U-5088L
APPENDIX B
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY
 LE17 BLANK
.
66
.—
.—
Circuit
Function Letter
A
B
c
.
D
--
F
G
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
APPENDIX B
TABLE B-I. Circuit function letters.
(See 30.1, 30.4 of Appendix B)
/
Circuit
~rmament
~hotographlc
;ontrol Surface
-
Instrument (other than
flight or engine
instruments)
Engine Instrument
Fltght Instrument
Landing Gear Ming
Foldlng
Examples
Stores Management
 System
Missiles/Rockets
Gun
Chemical
Camera
CameraCameraDoors
Heating
Autopilot
Flight Control
Wing Sweep
Trim Control
Airbrakes
Hydraulic System
Position Indicator
Pressure Gauge
Temperature Gauge
Clock
Temperature Gauge
Pressure Gauge
Quantity Meter
Flow Meter
Tachometer
Power Indicator
Nozzle Indicator
Gyroscopic Instrument
Attitude Indicator
Compass
Head Up Display
Altitude
Extension and Retraction
Brak~ng
Locking
Steering
Anti-Skid
Arrestor Hook
Utilities Hydraulics
67
—.—
Circuit
Function Letter
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
o
P
—
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
APPENDIX B
TABLE B-I.
 Circuit function letters (contl~ued).
Circuit
Heating
VentilatingDe-icing
and
~
Heating
De-icing
Cabin conditioning
Galley
Equipment Bay Cooling
-
In order to avoid confusion with the numeral one, the letter
“I” shall not be used for clrcult or cable Identlflcatlon.
Ignition
Engine Control
Engine Ignition
Jet-Assisted Take-Off
Vent and Flap
Propeller Control
Carburetor
Supercharging
Power Control
Nozzle Control
Thrust Reverser
Engine Starting
Ltghtlng {Illumination)
Miscellaneous
(Electrical)
Internal
External
Windshield Wiper & Spray
Dcx3rs
Hoist and Winch
Position (Seat & Pedal)
Auxiliary Power Unit
Emergency Power Unit
Cigarette Lighter
Unassigned
In order to avoid confusion with the numeral zero, the
letter “O” shall not be used for circuit or cable
iclentificatlon.
DC Power
Generation
Distribution
Battery
Rectifier
External Power
68
--
Circuit
Function Letter
Q
R
s
T
u
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
APPENDIX B
TABLE B-I.
 Clrcult function
 letters (condlnued).
Circuit
Fuel and Oil
Radio (Navigational
 and
Communication)
Radar (Pulse Technique)
Special Electronics
Miscellaneous
 (Electronic)
69
Examples
Valves
Pumps
Refueling/DefueTransfer
Dump
ling
Instrument Landing
Homing
Liai son
Marker Beacon
VHF Radio
UHF Radio
HF Radio
Intercommunication
Direction Flndlng
Radar Altimeter
Interception
Gun Aim!ng
Mapping
Navigation
Bomb Aiming
Search
Recognition (IFF)
Terrain Following
Active Electronic Counter
Inertial Navigation
Television
Measures
Reconnaissance
Computer
Weapon Aiming
Chaff Dispensing
Infra-Red
Electronic wiring for which the
11~,11$[s)l
 or “T” Identification
is not applicable shall be
assigned the circuit function
letter “U,” An example would
be common leads to electronic
equipments and systems, inter-
connection wiring, such as
antenna or power circuits
common to more than one
equipment.
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
APPENDIX
 B
TABLE B-I.
 Circuit functton
 letters (continuqti).
Circuit
Function Letter
Circuit
Examples
v
H
x
Both DC power cables and DC control cables for AC systems
shall be identified by the circuit function letter “V.”
Warning and Emergency
(except those listed
under other circuit
functions)
AC Power
Ball-Out Alarm
Oxygen Indicator
Passenger S~gn
Central/Master 14arning
Generation
Distribution
External Power
-
.
Y
Armament Special
Equipment (except
those listed under
clrcult function “A”)
L-_
 z
 When Experimental research Function standard any wiring such Letter Installation, C!rcuits.
 clrcult shall Is Installed, be has the 14hen used, been letter flight the preceded adopted appropriate “Z” test shall and by and becomes the be experimental
 Circuit
 removed.
 letter part “Z.”
 of a
70
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-k&5088L
APPENDIX B
i
I
I
ALTERNATE
METHOD
-
2
02
 u
 P 215A 4 N ALUM
 P!
-1--
 I
 2’
I
SUFFIX
 II
I
I
 GROUND,
 PHASE, OR THERMOCOUPLE
 LETTER
 5
I WIRE SIZE NUMBER
 A
I
WIRE SEGMENT
 LETTER
 4
/
 WIRE NUMBER
I
 N
1
 CIRCUIT FUNCTION LETTER
I—— ————
 ——-—
 ————
 -.
 UNIT
 NUMBER
 A
L
Applies ti all circuit
 functions
 except
 type designated
 equipment.
 u
M
%.
,
FIGURE B-1 .
 Example of wire Identification
 coding.
(See 3.9.3.1, 30.2)
ALTERNATE
METHOD
R
c
PHASE,
 OR TH ERMOCOUPLE
 LETTER
K
I
 WIRE SIZE NUMBER
I
 I
 WIRE SEGMENT
 LETTER
 2
I
 I
 I
 I
 wtRE NUMBER
EQUIPMENT
 IDENTIFICATION
 4
I—-—
 -----
 -----
 ----
 uNIT
 NUMBER
 .
b
Applies
 to t~’pe designated
 equipment.
B
12
FIGURE B-2.
 Example of wire identification
 cod~.
(See 3.9.3.1, 30.2)
10
N
L
71
T1
~x2A20’—
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
APPENDIX B
T, ~
PHASE SEQUENCE
TI=T2=T3
,6’,,,
(a) Slt4GLE PHASE SYSTEM
-—1,
T1
X34A14A ~
T6
T,
1=
I
X17A14N —.11
T3
~
 X5A14B ~
~
PHASE SEQUENCE
T1- 72- T3
T6
x29*1K
 .—o
(b) THREE - PHASE “Y*’ SYSTEM
‘17A16A ~
T3
L
)
12
13
(c)THREE-
X65A16N—I
X2ZA16C ~
PHASE DELTA
 SYSTEM
II
(FOR INVERTIZRSHAVIXG
 CONNECTORSWITII
 PHASE ROTATIOX
 C-B-A AT
THIZ PINS, THE CORRESPONDING
 TIZRhIINAL
 DESIGNATIONS
 zIRE Tl - T2 - T3
AND T13tZ \VIRE IDENTIFICATION
 PIIASIZ LETTERS
 SIiOULD BE CONSISTENT
WITH FIGURE
 (C)
 ABOVE.
 )
FIGURE B-3.
 Examples of wire identification
 as applied to ac power
 wlr~.
—-.(See 30.8.2)
72
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
APPENDIX C
NON-SIGNIFICANT HIRE IDENTIFICATION
(See 3.9.1)
~
10.
 SCOPE
10.? Scope. This appendix establishes the procedure for assigning the
individual codes for each wire, cable and harness wtthiri the scope of this
specification when the type of ~dentlflcation code Is specified as
“non-significant” In accordance with 3.9.1 and 6.2.” The wire identification
is “non-significant” in that it does not Ind!cate the function of the
circuit. This identification shall be for use in wiring data and for physical
Identification of installed wiring. This appendix Is a mandatory part of the
specification.
 The information contained herein is intended for compliance.
20. APPLICABLE DOCUMENTS
 This section is not applicable
 to this
appendix.
30.
 REQUIREMENTS
30.1 Harness identification.
 Each harness shall be identified by the
class letter “N” followed by a distinct wire harness number identifier of not
more than four digits.
30.2 Wire identification,
 Each wire
 shall be assigned a unique
alpha-numeric identification (wire number)
 to distinguish It from all other
wires In the aerospace vehicle.
 Each wire
 number shall Include the wire
harness identification, a wire identifier,
 a wire gage number and where
applicable, special coding for wire color,
 thermocouple wire and shields.
Example:
The wire number will
w
 192
 -
 06
 -
 22
 xx
 read “H192-06-22XX”
(a)
 (b)
 (f)
 (c)
 (f)
 (d)
 (e)
(a)
 Hire harness class letter.
(b)
 Hire harness number identifier (maximum of 4 digits, see 30.1).
(c)
 Hire identifier (maxlmumof
 4 dlglts, see 30.2.1).
(d)
 Hire gage number (see 30.2.2).
(e)
 Special coding (see 30.2.3).
(f)
 Hyphen separation.
30.2.1 Hire identifier.
 The wire Identifier shall distinguish each wire
from all others within a given harness.
 Harness to harness continuity of the
wire identifier is a requirement for wires joined by splices.
 Harness to
harness continuity of the wire identifier is not a requirement for all other
wires but should be considered as a design objective.
 The wire identifier
shall not exceed four digits.
30.2. 1.1 Hire identifiers 900 to 999 and 9000 to 9999 inclusive, shall
be researched for use by the procuring activity to identify wires installed by
service modifications.
73
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-I+5088L
APPENDIX C
30.2.2 Hire qage number. The wire gage number ~dentlfte~’ the wire
Size. For coaxial cables and thermocouple wires, the wire gagd may be omitted
from the wire Identification.
30.2
 3
 Special coding.
30.2 3.1 Thermocouple ulre.
 For thermocouple
 wire, the following
 letter
codes sha’ 1 be used as applicable:
Chrome 1
Alumel
Iron
Constantan
Copper
-
CR
AL
FE
CN
Cu
Example:
 H192-645-CR
.-
30.2.3.2 Color-coded cable. Jacketed, shielded and/or twisted conductor
cable consisting of 2 or more wires which are color coded by single strips or
bands or by solld colors shall be assigned the same wire Identifier.
 The
color of each conductor shall be identified by using the two letter code shown
below followlng the wire gauge number.
Letter
 Letter
Color
 Code
 Color
 Cod e
Black
 BK
 Blue
 BL
Brown
 BR
 Violet
 VT
Red
 RD
 Gray
 GY
Orange
 OR
 Hhite
 HH
Yellow
 YE
 Pink
 PK
Green
 GN
See the example In 30.2. 3.3 for a shielded, tri-conductor,
 color-coded
 cable.
30.2.3.3 Shields.
 Shielded cable having ccxnmon wire Identifiers
ass~gned In accordance with 30.2.3.2
 shall be assigned the same number as the
conductor(s).
 Shields over complete harnesses or over groups of wires having
different wire Identifiers assigned In accordance with 30.2.1 shall be
assigned separate wire identifiers.
 The suffix “SH” shall fo’ low the
“wire-identifier.”
a.
Example of a shield over wires separately
 iden’ ified in
accordance with 30.2.1:
N192-019-Z2
W192-020-22
N192-600-SH
74
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-N-5088L
APPENDIX
 C
b.
 Example of a shielded s!ngle conductor:
 /
bi201-019-22
W201-019-SH
c.
 Example of a shielded, color-coded
 tri–conductor:
W201-363-22 RD
14201-362-22 BL
14201-362-22 YE
W201-362-SH
30.2.3.4
 Aluminum wire.
 For alumlnum wire, “ALUM” (if total number of
digits exceeds 15, “AM” shall be used) shall be added as a suffix to the wire
identification code.
75
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
FIIL-W-5088L
APPENDIX C
.
THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY
 LEFT BLANK
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
1’
Paragraph
Accessibility ......................................................
 3.17.9
Accessories
Connector ........................................................
 3.14.14
Engine mounted ...................................................
 3.10.19
Aluminum
Terminals ........................................................
 3.20.2
Hire .............................................................
 3.8.2
Wire junctions ...................................................
 3.17.8
Amb~ent temperature ................................................
 3.8.8.2
Anti-chafl ngprovislons
 ............................................
 3.11.4
Arrangement ofwlrlng
 ..............................................
 3.10.1
Assembly ...........................................................
 3.10.11
Bundle and group size ..............................................
 3.10.2
Cables
Coaxial ..........................................................
 3.8.4
Caps, dust .........................................................
 3.14.11
Circuits
Parallel .........................................................
 3.10.15
Sensitive ........................................................
 3.10.12
Clamp size .........................................................
 3. 11.1.2
Coaxial
Cables ...........................................................
 3.8.4
Cable support ....................................................
 3.11.s
Connectors ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 3.14.4
Selection ......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 30.1.5,
Appendix A
Code
Assignment of !dent ficatlon .....................................
 3.9.1
Hire and cable iden ification ....................................
 3.9
Hire size color code .............................................
 3.9.5
Commonality ........................................................
 3.3.4
Compass deviation ...0.... ..........................................
 3.10.10
Component selection and installation ...............................
 3.7
Conduit ............................................................
 3.13
Flttlngs .........................................................
 3.13.5
Flexlble metallic ................................................
 3.13.2
Installation .....................................................
 3.13.6
Ignition .........................................................
 3.13.10
Nonmetallic .................4....................................
 3.13.3
Radius of bends ..................................................
 3.13.11
Rigid metalllc ...................................................
 3.13.1
Size .............................................................
 3.13.4
Conductivity ..................... ..................................
 3.17.3
Connectors ........................$.. ..............................
 3.14
Accessories ......................................................
 3.14.14
Coaxial ..$.......................................................
 3.14.4
Fireproof and firebal l..... .......................................
 3.14.3
Identification ...................................................
 3.9.4
Installation ................$....................................
 3.14.5
Molstureproof ................................................. ...
 3.14.1
Triaxial .........................................................
 3.14.4
77
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-14-5088L
INDEX (continued)
Paragraph
Contacts ........................................................... 3.14.2
Solder ........................................................... 3.14.10
Spare ............................................................ 3.14.9
Contractor’ s specification. ........................................ 3.3.3
Copper terminals ................................................... 3.20.1
Corona prevention .................................................. 3.8.7
Corona prevention related information .............................. 6.6
Current carrying capacity .......................................... 3.8.8.1
Current ratings, wire..... ......................................... 6.7
Cushion clamps ..................................................... 3.11 .1.4
Data requirements, contract ........................................ 6.2.1
Dead end!ng ........................................................ 3.10.5
Definitions ........................................................ 6.3
Diagrams
Master ........................................................... 6.9.2
Schematic ........................................................ 6.9.1
Wiring ........................................................... 6.9
Dissimilar metals .................................................. 3.6.1.1
Drainage ........................................ ................... 3.13.8
Conduit .......................................................... 3.13.8
Connector
 ....................................................... 3. 14.6.1
Drip loop .......................................................... 3.11.8
Dummy receptacles ............................... ................... 3.14.12
Electromagnetic compatibility ...................................... 3.10.8,
30.9 ApP.B
Engine mounted accessories ......................................... 3.10.19
Equipment
Essential ........................................................ 3.10.14
Gas and fluldllnes
 .............................................. 3.11.11
GFAE wiring ...................................................... 3.11.14
High temperature .............................. ................... 3.10.16
Installation, electrical and electronic .......................... 6.4
Insulated boxes .................................................. 3.12.3
GFAE aircraft equipment ............................................ 3.3.5
GFAEequipment
 wiring .............................................. 3.11.14
Gromnets ........................................................... 3.11 ,6.4
Ground return ...................................................... 3.12
Grounding .......................................................... 3.13.!?
Harnesses .......................................................... 3.8.5
Hlghdensit yharnesssize
 .......................................... 3.10.2.1
High-temperatureequlpment
 ......................................... 3.10.16
Hinges ............................................................. 3.18.2
Ignition .........................................................4. 3.10.9
Conduit ......................................................... 3.13.10
Individual tests ................................................... 4.6
Inspection and maintenance ......................................... 3.10.3
Of first vehicle ................................................ 4.4
Install ationdetai lsforwlri
 ng .................................... 3.10
Installat on of electronic
 and
 electronic equipment ................ 6.4
Installat on of connectors
 .........................................
 3.14.5
Insulated equipment boxes
 .........................................
 3.12.3
78
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL44-5088L
INDEX (continued)
Paragraph
Insulating materials ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.6.2.1
Insulation tape .......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.11 .6.1
Insulation sleeving ...... . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.11 .6.2
International standardlzat on agreement
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6.10
Junction
Boxes ............................................................ 3.18
Box construction ................................................. 3.18.1
Box identification ............................................... 3.18.3
Boxwirlng
 ....................................................... 3.18.4
Installation ..................................................... 3.17.1
Junctions .................... ...................................... 3.17
Alumlnum wire .................................................... 3.17.8
Essential circuit
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.17.7
Exposed .................... ...................................... 3.17.6
Llmltations on support ............................................. 3.11.3
Loose parts .................. ...................................... 3.23.1
Ma!ntainabl lity .................................................... 3.8.9
Manuals, Technical ................................................. 6.5
Harking ............................................................ 3.9.3
Master diagrams .................................................... 6.9.2
Materials .......................................................... 3.6
Metals ............................................................. 3.6.1
M~nimum wire size .................................................. 3.8.8
+.
Missile wiring ..................................................... 3.8.8.3
Modification ....................................................... 3.3.6
Molstureproof connectors ........................................... 3.14.1
Multiple grounds ................................................... 3.12.2
Nacelle w~rlng ..................................................... 3.10.17
Nonmetal llc covers .................. ............................... 3.17.10
Nonmetals .......................................................... 3.6.2
Parallel circuits .................................................. 3.10.15
Plastic cable straps ......... ...................................... 3.11.2.2
Plastic clamps ..................................................... 3.11.1.1
Potting ............................................................ 3.14.8
Power systems ...................................................... 3.]0.13
Preparation for termination .. ...................................... 3.17.2
Primary support .................................................... 3.11.1
Protection and support ............................................. 3.11
Provision plugs ......................................... ........... 3.14.13
Rad!us
Of bend (wire or cable) ............................... ........... 3.11.7
Of bends (conduit) ............................................... 3.13.11
Routing wiring ....-..................,............................. 3.10.6
Safety wiring ...................................................... 3.14.7
Schematic diagrams ................................................. 6.9.1
Sealing materials .................................................. 3.6.3
Secondary support .................................................. 3.11.2
Selection of parts and materi als ................................... 3.3
Sensitive circuits ................................................O 3.10.12
Service llfe ....................................................... 3.4
Shield terminations ................................................ 3.12.1.1
79
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-W-5088L
INDEX (continued)
Shielded wire grounding ............................................ 3.12.1
Slack in wiring .................................................... 3.10.7
Smoke and fire hazards ............................................. 3.5
Solder type contacts ........ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.14.10
Spacing and creepage distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.17.4
Spare contacts .............. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ------
 .. 3.14.9
Special protection .......... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.11.10
Splices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3.19
.....................Standardlzatlon, lnternationa’ agreement ........................... 6.10
Support at connectors ..........1................................... 3.11 .1.3
SWAMP applications ................................................. 3.8.10.1
Terminals .......................................................... 3.20
Aluminum ......................................................... 3.20.2
Copper ........................................................... 3.20.1
Terminal boards .................................................... 3.21
Terminal n~pples ................................................... 3.11 .6.3
Terminations, shield ............................................... 3.12.1.1
Thermocouple wiring ................................................ 3.8.10.4
Triaxial connectors ................................................ 3.14.4
Itagedrop
 ....................................................... 3.8.8.4
re
Aluminum ......................................................... 3.8.2
Alum! numw!re junctions .......................................... 3.17.8
 -
Arrangement of ................................................... 3.10.1
Current ratings .................................................. 6.7
Minimum size ..................................................... 3.8.8
Rad!us of bend ....... ............................................ 3.11.7
Selection for special application ................................ 3.8.10
Shielded grounding ............................................... 3.12.1
Size color code system... ........................................ 3.9.5
Wire and cable identification ......................................
Hiring .................,.....-...............--..........-...-..... ::;.5
Changes .......................................................... 4.5
Diagrams ......................................................... 6.9
Fuel tanks, through .............................................. 3.11.12
Fuel tanks, inside ............................................... 3.11.13
In bilges ........................................................ 3.10.18
Filssile .......................................................... 3.8.8.3
Mockup ........................................................... 4.3
Nacel le .......................................................... 3.10.17
Near moving parts ................................................ 3.11.9
Protection and support ........................................... 3.11
Routing .......................................................... 3.10.6
3.14.7
Safety ...........................................................Selection ........................................................ 3.8
Slack ............................................................ 3.10.7
Special protection ............................................... 3.11.10
Temperature degradation. ......................................... 3.8.’
Thermocouple ..................................................... :.:.’ 0.4
20
Hheel well areas .................................................
3;8
Wiring selection ................................................. .
3.23
Workman ship ...........-. ...........................................80
DownloadedREFERENCEDDOCUMENT NO.
MIL-C-17
MIL-I-631
MIL-I-3190
MIL-C-3607
MIL-C-3650
MIL-C-3643
MIL-C-3655
MIL-B-5087
MIL-E-6051
MIL-C-6136
MIL-E-7080
MIL-T-7099
MIL-F-7179
MIL-I-7444
MIL-C-7762
MIL-B-7883
MIL-T-7928
MIL-S-8516
MIL-I-8700
MIL-C-22520
MIL-C-22759
MIL-I-23053
MIL-S-23190
MIL-S-23586
MIL-I-23594
MIL-M-24041
MIL-C-25038
MIL-C-25516
MIL-C-26637
MIL-C-27500
MIL-C-39012
MIL-C-39029
MIL-T-43435
MIL-C-49142
MIL-A-55339
MIL-W-81044
MIL-M-81260
MIL-H-81381
MIL-T-81490
MIL-T-81714
MIL-T-81714/11
MIL-T-81714/12
MIL-S-81824
MIL-C-83517
MIL-S-83519
MIL-C-85049
MIL-C-85485
MIL-S-85848
FED-STD-595
DOD-STD-1OO
from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-H-5088L
DOCUMENTS
 INDEX
 I
PARAGRAPH
30.1.4, Appendix A
3.11 .6.2
3.11.6.2, 3.9.3.3.1
3.14.4
3.14.4
3.14.4
3.14.4
3.12, 3.13.9
3.10.8, 3.13
3.13.2
6.4
3.19.1, 3.20.2
3.6.1
3.11 .6.2
3.10.10
3.14.10
3.19.1, 3.20.1, 3.20.3
3.6.3, 3.14.8
6.4
3.14.2
Tables A-I & A-II,
Appendix A, 3.8.10.1, 3.8.10.2
3.9.3.3.1, 3. 11.6.2.1
3.9.3.3.1, 3.11.2.2, 3.11.1, 3.11.5d
3.6.3, 3.14.8
3.11 .2.3
3.14.8
Table A-I, Appendix A
3.14.4
3.14.4
30.1.4, Appendix A
3.14.4
3.14.2
3.11 .2.1
3.14.4
3.14.4
Tables A-I & A-II, Appendix A
6.9,2
Tables A-I & A-II, Appendix A
30.1.5,1, Appendix A, 3.8.4
3.12.2, 3.21.2, 3.21.3
3.8.10.4, 3.19.3
3.8.10.4, 3.19.3
3.8.10.4, 3.19.1
3.14.4
3.12.1.1
3.14.14
3.8.10.3, 30.1.6, Appendix A
3.9.3.3.1
3.10. 12.2
6.9, 6.9.2
81
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
MIL-M-5088L
REFERENCEDDOCUMENT NO.
MIL-STD-196
141L-STD-454
NIL-STD-681
MIL-STD-704
DOO-STD-863
MIL-STD-889
MIL-STD-970
MIL-STD-1353
MIL-STD-1388
MIL-STD-1553
/4S3368
!4s3373
MS 18029
MS21266
MS21919
MS25171
MS25274
MS25281
MS25435
MS25436
t4S25437
MS25438
)4S25439
?4S25440
MS27212
MS27488
MS33540
MS35489
MS90376
MS90387
AND10380
NAS813
NAS820
MIL-HDBK-216
ANSI Y14.15
ANSI Y32.2
ANSI Y32.16
ASCC 104/19
STANAG 3317
STANAG 3347
ARMY TM 55-1500-323-24
NAVAIR 01-lA-505
USAF T.O. 1-1A-14
DOCUMENTS
 INDEX
 I
PARAGRAPH
30.13,
 Appendix B
3.14.10
3.9.3.3.4
3.8.8.4
6.2
3.6.1.1
3.3
3.14, 3.14.4, 3.14. 11.1
3.4
3.10.15
3.9.3.3.1
3.21.2
3.21.1
3.11 .6.4
3.11.1
3.11.6.3, 3.16
3.10.5
3.11.1
3.20.2
3.20.2
3.20.2
3.20.2
3.19.1
3.20.2
3.21.1, 3.21.3
3.21.2, 3.19.3, 3.14.9
3.14.7
3.11 .6.4
3.14.11
3.11 .2.2
3.13.5
3,14.11
3.14.11
3.8.4, 3.14.4, 6.5
6.9
6.9
6.9, 6.9.2.1
6.10
6.10
6.10
6.5
6.5
6.5
82
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com
STANDARDIZATION
 DOCUMENT IMPROVEMENT
 PROPOSAL
lhtSTRUCllOhJS
9
I, The preparingactivity
 must completeblocks1,2,3,and 8. In block 1, both the d-ubent
 number and revision
letter
 shouldbe given.
2. The submitterofthisform must complete blocks 4,5,6,
 and 7.
3.
 The preparing activity must provide a reply within 30 days from receipt of the form.
NOTE: This form may not be used to request copies of documents, nor to requestWaivers,or clarification
 of
requirements on current contracts.
 Comments submittedon thisfofm do ~t ctitute m imply● uthorization
 to
waive●ny @on
 ofthe referenced ocument(s)orto amend contractual requirements.
m&&:::::.,>G
 . .’.’k..k
 “b,:...,<:,<...
 2. DOCUMENT DATE (YYMAKJO)
&ENQ’:#”wwEFt$il
 ‘“-;?:;.?;;;
 910510
. .:. : .; . :+-4. ..+%’iwsx?%%?$$:w
 : ‘:ww~~’
3. DOCUMENT TITLE
WIRING,
 AEROSPACE VEHICLE
-ATURE
 OF CHANGE [)dentify pwagraph number
 ● nd inclti
 proposed rewrite,
 If posd~e.
 Attach
 ● xtv ~ts
 u needed.)
Y. ‘“XASON
 FoR ftECOMMENDATION
1. MEPARING
 ACTIVITY
B
 “4ME
Commanding Officer
NAEC SESD (Code
 5313)
L AOORESSOmfude Zip CudeJ
Lakehurst, NJ 08733-5100
DO Form 1426, (KT
 89
b. TELEPHONE Odude
(1) Commercial
908-323-7438
-t
Code)
(2) AUTOVON
624-7438
IF YOU DO MOT RECEIVE A REPLY WITHIN 4S DAYS, CONTA~:
 -
Oefwme Quality ● nd Standardization
 OfficQ
5203 L@e$burg Pike, Suite 1403, Falls Churth, VA 2204 I-3466
Telephone (703) 7562340
 AUTOVON 289-2340
Previous editions we obsolete.
Wsnw
Downloaded from http://www.everyspec.com